OFFICE OF THE DEAN OF STUDIES

Course
of Study
2024–2025

180 Main Street
Andover, Massachusetts 01810
978-749-4050
www.andover.edu

201

Return to Table of Contents

CONTENTS
Statement of Purpose...................... 2
Statement of Values......................... 2
A Vision of the
Academic Program............................ 3

• Leaves of Absence...................10
Academic Skills Center (ASC).......11
• Peer Tutoring............................11
• Study, Organizational, and
Time Management Skills.........11

Essential Elements
of Student Life................................... 4

Student Accessibility
Services (SAS)................................11

An Academic Community................ 5

• Reasonable
Accommodations.....................11

Office of the Dean of Studies..........5
Department & Division Chairs........5
Point Person.....................................6
Advisors............................................6
Advising and College Counseling...6

Courses Offered
Art....................................................... 19
Classical Studies (see World
Languages)........................................ 97
Dance (see Theatre & Dance)..........89
English...............................................24
History & Social Science...............39

• Standardized Testing
Accommodations.................... 12

Interdisciplinary Studies...............48

Planning an Academic Program....12

Mathematics, Statistics &
Computer Science..........................60

The Educational Program............. 12
General Description....................... 12

Music.................................................. 70

The Curriculum.............................. 12

Natural Sciences............................. 75

Academic Integrity..........................6

Placement of Newly Admitted
Students......................................... 12

Biology........................................... 75

Workload and assignments............7

Course Requests........................... 12

Adding, Dropping, and Changing
Courses............................................7

Course Load................................... 12

Student Requests for a Change in
Teacher.............................................7

• Four-Course Load Policy......... 13

Philosophy & Religious Studies...84

Course Enrollments and
Cancellations................................. 13

Physical Education..........................88

Independent Projects.................... 13

Theatre & Dance..............................89

Participation in Off-Campus
Programs........................................ 13

World Languages.............................94

General Information....................... 14

Classics.......................................... 97

The Educational Program............. 14

Greek.............................................. 97

Diploma Requirements................. 14

Latin................................................ 97

Planning a Program of Study....... 16

French........................................... 100

• Junior Year............................... 16

German......................................... 101

• Core Team..................................9

• Lower Year................................ 16

Japanese...................................... 103

• Full Team....................................9

• Upper Year............................... 16

Russian......................................... 105

• Student Program
Review Committee (SPRC)....10

• Senior Year............................... 17

Spanish........................................ 106

Academic Expectations
and Policies........................................ 6

Auditing Courses.............................8
Classroom Visitors..........................8
Textbooks.........................................8
Completing Academic Work...........8
• At the End of the Term..............8
Mid-term and End-of-Term
Academic Reports...........................9
Student Support............................. 9
Faculty Processes and Actions for
Supporting Students.......................9

• End-of-Term
Review Committee..................10
End-of-Term Review Process........10
Student Response Team (SRT)....10

• Six-Course Load Policy........... 12

Chemistry.......................................77
Interdisciplinary Science.............. 78
Physics...........................................80

Chinese.......................................... 94

Course Enrollments &
Cancellations................................. 17
Course Numbers........................... 17
Key to Course Designations.......... 18

PLEASE NOTE: The information that follows is accurate as of 8/22/24.
Phillips Academy reserves the right to make subsequent changes.

1

Return to Table of Contents

STATEMENT OF PUR POS E
Phillips Academy’s Constitution charges the faculty to teach “youth from every quarter” to aspire equally to knowledge and goodness. This
obligation challenges students to develop what is finest in themselves and others, for others and themselves. Phillips Academy is committed to
nurturing an intentionally diverse, inclusive community that encourages students and adults to respect, inspire, and learn from one another.
Guided by the ideal of non sibi, leading lives “not for self,” the Phillips Academy community promotes a balance of intellectual curiosity,
engagement, leadership, and service in the pursuit of excellence: academic, civic, and moral.

STAT EMENT OF VALUES
Non Sibi—We strive to embody the ideal of non sibi with intentional teaching, learning, and engagement guided by a sense of responsibility
toward the global community and natural world.
Youth from Every Quarter—We are committed to creating an equitable and inclusive school in which students from diverse backgrounds,
cultures, and experiences—including race, ethnicity, nationality, gender, socioeconomic class, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, and
ability—learn and grow together.
Knowledge and Goodness—We challenge students in mind, body, and spirit such that they may pursue the knowledge, develop the skills, and
sustain the integrity needed to lead a responsible, fulfilling life.

2

Return to Table of Contents

A VISIO N OF THE ACA DEMI C PROGRAM
In its 1778 constitution, Phillips Academy is charged with ensuring its students learn “the great end and real business of living.” Inspired by this
charge, we seek to cultivate in our students the capacities—among them analytical rigor, imaginative thought, and nuanced skepticism—necessary to identify and attain a great and worthy end: human flourishing. Our founders knew that adolescence is formative. By introducing our
students to the diversity of human experience and to the complexities of the natural world, we push them to understand the world as it is. By
fostering their abilities to question beliefs, systems, and the ways things are done, we press them to envision the world they seek to create.
To prepare its students for life in the world, Phillips Academy offers a liberal education. Oriented to all aspects of human experience, liberal education affirms that knowledge is intrinsically good and denies that education terminates with technical skill or professional success.
Resisting specialization in favor of breadth, it initiates students into connected fields of understanding and prepares them to lead lives characterized by learning and understanding, responsibility and freedom.
The practice of responsibility and freedom demands that citizens have dispositions of the critical mind to recognize fact and valid argument
and to comprehend the implications of the knowledge they produce and the things they create. It requires that citizens act against intolerance and injustice and build communities conducive to human flourishing. To help students become such citizens, Phillips Academy seeks to
prepare graduates who are educated broadly, discerning of ideologies, and committed to the public good.
—Adopted by the Faculty in February 2022

3

Return to Table of Contents

ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS OF STUDENT L I F E
In addition to abiding by the school rules in The Blue Book, an essential part of student life is the ability of each student to meet the school’s
stated responsibilities and expectations as listed below:
• Live cooperatively and respectfully in a dormitory and school community, sharing the responsibilities inherent in living together, without
adversely affecting others.
• Behave responsibly, respectfully, and honestly to all as a member and representative of the Phillips Academy community, whether on or
off campus.
• Function independently and safely with respect to basic living and self-care tasks (e.g., nutrition, sleep, personal hygiene).
• Make use of academic, psychological, and health resources as deemed necessary by adults responsible for students.
• Attend and participate in all required classes, education programs, events, or obligations, some of which may be unique to Phillips
Academy (e.g., Empathy, Balance, and Inclusion programming; Martin Luther King Jr. Day; work duty; advising; and required weekend
events). The total of excused and unexcused absences from classes and all other required events, or the total of excused and unexcused
absences from any one class or required event, should not exceed 20 percent of the total number of required meetings at any point in a
term.
• Be able to return to full participation in required class activities and complete required assignments and assessments following approved
extensions of up to a maximum of 20 percent of the term.
These essential elements of student life were updated and approved by the Senior Administrative Council on August 29, 2022.

4

Return to Table of Contents

AN ACADEMI C COMMUNI TY
Office of the Dean of Studies
Dean of Studies—Caroline Odden
The dean of studies is primarily responsible for leading and coordinating the academic departments, divisions, and advisors and for monitoring
all aspects of the academic program.

Director of Studies—Patrick Rielly
The director of studies is primarily responsible for supporting individual students, including assessing the types of supports a student might
need or modifications to a student’s program that might be helpful, considering and determining exceptions to academic policies and procedures, adjudicating cases of academic integrity, and coordinating student leaves of absence and returns.

Director of Student Information and Registrar—John Wilson
The director of student information and registrar is primarily responsible for managing student enrollment, coordinating processes and procedures with administrative offices, and overseeing all aspects of recorded student data from matriculation to graduation.

Associate Dean of Studies for Scheduling—Mika E. Latva-Kokko
The associate dean of studies for scheduling works with department chairs to build the academic schedule for each term, and then works with
students and advisors to schedule students into appropriate academic programs.

Associate Dean of Studies for Advising—Catherine Tousignant
The associate dean of studies for advising is primarily responsible for overseeing the advising program, advisor assignments, and the faculty
who serve as advisors, in addition to course requests, pathways to graduation, exceptions to program expectations, and independent project
applications.

Office Manager, Book Coordinator—Cindy Stewart
Administrative Assistant—Julie Powers
Department & Division Chairs
Art......................................................................................Hector Rene Membreño-Canales
Division of Natural Sciences..........................................Andrew Wall
Biology Department........................................................Keith Robinson
Chemistry Department...................................................Andrew Wall
Physics Department........................................................John Rogers
Division of World Languages.........................................Clara Isaza-Bishop
Chinese Department.......................................................Congmin Zhao
Classics Department........................................................Joshua Mann
French Department.........................................................Claire Gallou
German Department.......................................................Lisa Svec
Japanese Department.....................................................Teruyo Shimazu
Russian Department.......................................................Kassie Archambault
Spanish Department.......................................................Carmen Muñoz-Fernández
English..............................................................................Leon R. Calleja
History and Social Science.............................................Marisela Ramos
Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science..........Joel M. Jacob
Music.................................................................................Abbey Siegfried
Philosophy and Religious Studies..................................Kiran Bhardwaj
Physical Education..........................................................Elisa M. Joel
Theatre and Dance..........................................................Robert Lazar

5

Return to Table of Contents

Point Person
Each student, boarding and day, has a single adult serve as their point person for the entire year. The point person is the family’s main contact
at school. The point person, advisor, and cluster dean form the student’s core team, providing steady support and guidance—both personal and
academic—and a consistent connection throughout the entire year. For day students, the day student advisor serves as both point person and
advisor, while for boarding students, a house counselor serves as point person and most often a second adult serves as advisor. The point person
for a boarding student may change year to year, depending on student and faculty housing changes, while a day student’s point person will
likely stay constant year to year.

Advisors
The advisor supports a student’s navigation of the educational program, ensuring the completion of diploma requirements, guiding choices
around electives and extracurricular opportunities, and helping students develop the skills needed for success. Advisors oversee a student’s
course selection and multiyear planning. The advisor develops a personal knowledge of and relationship with the student, knowing the
student’s academic, extracurricular, and personal situation, strengths and weaknesses, interests, and aspirations. As one means of establishing and maintaining such a relationship, each advisee meets regularly with their advisor (weekly meetings, individually or in a group setting).
Most students will have a continuing relationship with the same advisor during their years at the school. New students meet with their advisor
during the orientation prior to the beginning of classes in September to review, adjust, and approve the course requests the student has made
during the spring or summer.

Advising and College Counseling
Advisors focus their attention on the development of each student during their time at Andover, and they do not have training or expertise
related to college admissions. Students are assigned college counselors in January of their upper year. Since each student also will work with a
college counselor, the advisor is not asked to be an expert on the entrance requirements of individual colleges and universities, programs within
these schools, or the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). Advisors can consult with a college counselor to discuss course selection,
college-related questions a student may raise, and when appropriate the student can go to College Counseling Office (CCO) during conference
period to meet with a counselor on duty. Student-athletes or other students who may be on a nontraditional timeline are encouraged to work
with their advisor and/or coach and connect with the CCO.

ACAD EM IC EXPECTATI ONS A ND POLI CI ES
Academic Integrity
Honesty is the basic value on which this community rests and is an essential component of academic integrity. Academic integrity is demanded
by the very nature of a school community. Honesty in the academic area means claiming as one’s own only that work which is one’s own. All
scholarship builds upon the ideas and information of others; the honest person makes clear in writing exactly what the source of any borrowed
information or idea is, whether it be library materials, the internet, classmates, or family members. Since words are the bearers of both information and the unique style of the writer, the words of others, if borrowed, must be properly acknowledged.
In addition, the honest person eschews cheating, falsifying data, and submitting work done for one course to secure credit in another. It is not
acceptable to submit one piece of work (e.g., notes, computer programs, lab reports, papers, etc.) to more than one course without prior consultation with, and written permission from, all instructors involved.
Students are required to engage in the Academy’s educational programming about academic integrity by watching assigned videos, participating in discussions, and completing assessments. If a student is unsure how to apply policies and guidelines to a particular course or assignment,
they should discuss the matter with the instructor.
With the rapidly expanding capabilities of large language models (LLMs)—artificial intelligence model types including, but not limited to,
ChatGPT, Google Bard, and LaMDA—students must be particularly wary of using such robust resources to complete academic work, and they
should assume, unless the instructor explicitly highlights otherwise, that the use of LLMs is prohibited. Using LLMs to generate or edit texts or
ideas, to solve problems or direct one on a pathway to doing so, or to identify or assess evidence, among other things, can easily lead a student
to committing an act of academic dishonesty, even inadvertently.
When it comes to the attention of the Dean of Studies Office that a student may have violated the Academy’s expectations of academic integrity,
the instructor, department chair, and director of studies will work together to gather relevant information. In consultation with the instructor
and department chair, the members of the Academic Integrity Committee (the director of studies, the dean of studies, and an assistant dean of
students) determine if a student has failed to meet the Academy’s expectations of academic integrity as well as the type of infraction based on
their knowledge of the full context in which the infraction occurred.
While the members of the Academic Integrity Committee and the department chair will draw on their experience of similar cases to help
ensure consistency across cases, other interested parties—including parents and guardians—have no role to play in this process.
The types of infraction are as follows:
• “Failure to follow instructions”—These infractions are recorded by the director of studies.
• “Failure to adequately cite the work of others”—These infractions are also recorded, and they require that the student meet with the
cluster dean, who will document the infraction in a letter.
• “Academic dishonesty”—Most of these infractions—cases of academic dishonesty—result in the student meeting with the Cluster Community Standards Committee, while egregious infractions may result in the student meeting with the Centralized Community Standards
Committee. A student with a second infraction, at any point in their time as a student at the Academy, should expect a stronger response.
Infractions of any type may also carry an academic penalty (e.g., awarding no credit or requiring a redo of an assignment or paper) to be
determined by the instructor and department chair. In addition, other forms of dishonesty—such as submitting a corrupt file or suggesting
an assignment has been submitted but being unable to provide evidence of having done so—can lead to a student meeting with the Cluster
Community Standards Committee or the Centralized Community Standards Committee.

6

Return to Table of Contents

Workload and Assignments
For each course, class time and homework time together should total approximately six to nine hours per week, depending on course level.
Given that courses will meet for 190 minutes in a five-day week, students may be assigned three to six hours of homework per course in a typical week. 100- and 200-level courses should have no more than four hours of homework per course in a typical week; 300-level courses should
have no more than five hours; and 400-, 500-, and 600-level courses should have no more than six hours.
Assignments should be due at the start of a class meeting and should be assigned at least 24 hours in advance. All information necessary for the
student to complete the assignment should be provided by that time. Assignments may not be assigned or due on Saturday or Sunday.
Students should be given at least one week’s advance notice before a major assignment is due. “Major” implies full-period tests and papers,
or projects assigned as more than a single night’s homework. No class may have more than one major assignment per week (Monday through
Friday) during any week of the term. In addition, no more than two major assignments may be required in the last three weeks of any term.
Students should expect to be prepared for up to two major assignments on a given day, in addition to the daily assignments for their other
courses. If a student has three or more major assignments due on a given day, the student may request postponement of all but two of those
assignments. It is the student’s responsibility to request the postponement from the teacher(s). Non-proctored assignments (such as papers)
should be moved in preference to proctored assignments (such as tests), and a collaborative assignment requiring the student’s participation
(such as peer editing, a group critique, or a group presentation) should not be moved unless there are no other options.
To avoid any misunderstanding about the precise reasons for the request and to document the request, the student must email the three (or more)
teachers giving major assignments, copying the student’s advisor and point person. The email should include a very brief listing of the assignments
due for each class and also specify the assignment that the student has requested be moved. Requests should be made at least 24 hours before the
assignment due date. A request made of an instructor within 24 hours of the original assignment due date will be honored at the discretion of the
instructor. Provided a student makes a request according to the guidelines specified above, teachers are expected to grant permission.
No assignment may be due the first day of class after a vacation.

Adding, Dropping, and Changing Courses
During the approved add/drop timeframe, a student may request to add or drop a course or to transfer into a different course; requests must
be approved by the student’s advisor (and college counselor as applicable). Section changes (same course, different period or teacher) and level
changes (e.g., CHM300 to CHM250) must be approved by the applicable department chair and student’s advisor. To make a course or section
change request, the student must submit an add-drop slip to the Dean of Studies office, signed by the advisor, college counselor and/or department chair as applicable.
Students may only attend classes that appear on their schedule. A teacher must not admit a student into their class unless the student appears
on their course roster (or the teacher has received authorization from the Dean of Studies Office to admit the student).
Under certain circumstances, students may be permitted to drop a course if they maintain the minimum course load allowed for their grade
level. (Refer to Course Load and Four-Course Load Policy sections elsewhere in this document.) There are two deadlines that apply to course
drop requests. The first deadline is typically the end of the third week of the term. The second deadline is typically the end of the second week
following midterm. Instructions for the petition process and the add/drop timeframe are posted on PAnet.
To drop a term-contained course, a student must have approval from their advisor and their college counselor (as applicable). The student must
submit an add/drop slip, with the necessary signature(s), to the Dean of Studies Office, or submit a petition, depending on timing. The Dean
of Studies Office may deny certain drop requests (e.g., a course required for a diploma). For drops requested after the third week of the term,
the student should discuss their intent to drop the course with their teacher before making the request, and the Dean of Studies Office should
notify the course instructor, the department chair, and the student’s point person once the drop has been approved. Requests to drop termcontained courses must be submitted by the second drop deadline.
Certain course sequences are designated in the Course of Study as two- or three-term commitments. Students enrolling in such a course
should understand that they are making a commitment to complete the entire course sequence—and that they may not be permitted to drop
the course after the first three weeks. If a student wishes to drop a multiterm commitment course at any point after the first three weeks of
the course (including at any point in a subsequent term), the student should first speak with the course instructor and the department chair
to determine whether it is possible to drop the course. If a drop is possible, then the student should contact the assistant dean of studies for
advising to ask permission to petition to drop the course. If permitted to move forward with the petition process, then the student must obtain
approval of their advisor, point person, college counselor (if applicable), teacher, and the department chair. Requests to petition to drop a multiterm course must be made by the second drop deadline.
The Academy’s medical director and/or the Student Response Team (SRT) may approve a course drop for health-related reasons. The Student
Program Review Committee (SPRC) also may approve a course drop.

Student Requests for a Change in Teacher
Recognizing that effective education requires productive relationships between teachers and students and that such relationships take time to
develop, and recognizing also that open discussion between the parties involved in seemingly difficult relationships is itself an important part
of education, the Academic Council has approved the following general procedure on student requests for a change of teacher:
1. Permission for a student to change teachers may be given by the department chair. The Academy does not accept requests for specific
teachers.
2. If there has been no previous relationship between the student and teacher, no request for change will be considered until an appropriate
period of time has passed (at least one term). During this time both parties are expected to make good faith efforts to develop an effective
relationship. Requests for change informed by an appropriate period of experience will be considered according to departmental
policies, which may include a requirement that a conversation about the request has occurred between the student and the teacher. The
department chair is available to facilitate these conversations if either the student or the teacher so desires.
3. Students are advised that permission to change teachers carries no guarantee that the student will be assigned to any particular section or
teacher. Students also are informed that such teacher changes may require that other elements of their schedule be altered.
Teacher changes are not always possible (e.g., if there are no other sections of a course or if all other sections are full).

7

Return to Table of Contents

To minimize disruptions after schedules have been released, requests for a change of teacher from fall-to-winter, or winter-to-spring, should be
discussed with the department chair during the course request period for the following term, so that approved changes can be included in the
scheduling process. Requests made after schedules have been released will likely be denied.

Auditing Courses
In certain circumstances, it is appropriate for a student to audit a course. An audit may be approved if the student’s team determines that the
student should preview or review material in order to perform adequately in the subject area during a subsequent term. Audits most commonly
occur in continuing math sequences. Audits are not approved for students who wish to “sit in” on classes.
To audit a course, a student must have the permission of the department chair, as well as their teacher, advisor, college counselor (if applicable),
and primary house counselor (if applicable). Requests to switch to audit status must be made to the department chair by the audit deadline
(typically, the end of the second week following midterm). A lack of effort on the part of a student is not a valid reason to switch to audit status.
An audited course does not appear on the student’s transcript, but an audited course is included in the student’s course count.

Classroom Visitors
To maintain the integrity of our classroom experience, class visitors are discouraged, with the exception of department colleagues, guest lecturers, and prospective students during the Spring Visit program. Family Weekend offers an opportunity for families to visit sample classes.

Textbooks
The Academy currently purchases course materials in bulk for all classes. These materials—physical books, information for access to electronic
resources, or information on availability of books at the library—will be provided by teachers on the first day of classes. To cover the cost of
the books and other course materials, the Academy will include a Course Materials Charge of $800 on the first student tuition invoice. This
yearly $800 charge will be placed in a separate Course Materials Account; the account will also be used to cover art fees, PSATs, and Advanced
Placement Exams. If you have any questions, please email Cindy Stewart at cstewart@andover.edu.

Completing Academic Work
Because the learning of the individual and the class is impeded when a student falls behind, students are expected to complete assignments on
time. Due dates for major assignments can only be rescheduled if:
• an instructor has agreed to an extension in advance (with or without a grade penalty at the teacher’s discretion). Instructors are asked
to document each instance of a rescheduled major assignment using the student alert system, and students with a pattern of late
assignments will be referred to their cluster dean and the director of studies.
• the assignment is one of more than two major graded assignments due on the same day (see above).
• the chief medical officer indicates that the student’s medical condition warrants the rescheduling of the assignment. Students unable to
complete graded assignments after a two-week period as approved by the medical director, may be required to switch to pass/fail in one
or more courses, drop one or more courses, or take a leave of absence.
During the final week of the term, instructors may accept work from students only during the final class meeting. In rare situations, instructors
may accept work up until 3 p.m. on the last day of classes, which marks the end of the term. Instructors cannot issue extensions beyond the end
of the term. At the end of the term, exceptions to these policies may be granted only via the process outlined below.

At the End of the Term
All academic work must be submitted by the end of the term.
Exceptions will be granted only rarely and must have the authorization of the director of studies. Typically, exceptions are the result of a personal or family emergency or an urgent health concern.
All exceptions resulting from a health concern require the authorization of the chief medical officer, who notifies the director of studies that
an exception is warranted. To qualify, the medical condition must be acute and unavoidable, and of lasting duration and intensity to impact
the completion of coursework, and only rarely, of a more chronic nature when the student has had continuous care by a licensed health
professional. Conditions of a chronic nature must first be addressed through course drops at the discretion of the chief medical officer and the
Student Response Team (SRT). The chief medical officer and the SRT must be aware of the chronic condition prior to the end of the term.
In consultation with the chief medical officer as appropriate, the director of studies may respond to an exception in four ways:
• The student’s final assessment may be rescheduled. The rescheduling of an end-of-term exam due to a medical condition requires that the
student, whether day or boarding, remain in electronic isolation in the Rebecca M. Sykes Wellness Center until they have completed the
exam.
• The student may receive an Incomplete. If an Incomplete is granted, the terms of completing the work will be determined by the director
of studies in consultation with the teacher and the department chair. In most instances, students will be required to submit papers and
projects and to make up tests by a particular deadline in the following term. In continuing course sequences, students may be required
to submit the work within the first two weeks of the following term to advance to the next course in the sequence. At the latest, all work
must be submitted by the last day of classes in the following term. Once the deadline has passed, the final grade for the course will
be determined by assigning a grade of 0 to any missing work. In some cases, this will result in a failing final grade for the course. The
terms of completing the necessary work—and the deadline for doing so—should be included in a teacher comment to accompany the
Incomplete grade on the end-of-term report.
If a student is authorized to receive a grade of Incomplete but the student insists on completing and submitting the necessary work to
receive a final grade, then the grade earned will stand and will not be adjusted later.
• The director of studies, in consultation with the applicable instructor and department chair, may issue a passing grade for a course.
Credit will be indicated on the transcript with a “P” instead of a numerical grade. A “P” will be considered for cases in which the essential
elements of the course have been completed, but the remainder of the work cannot be submitted after the end of the term due to the

8

Return to Table of Contents

nature of the assignment(s) or the enrollment circumstances of the student. Once a “P” has been assigned, it will not be changed to a
numerical grade.
• In some extraordinary cases, the director of studies may permit the applicable instructor, in consultation with the applicable department
chair, to waive one or more assignments and allow the instructor to award the resulting numerical grade. This will be considered only for
cases in which the student has met, at the minimum, all the essential elements of the course.
No final term grade, and no assessment grade from the final week of the term, may be shared with any student until after the end of the term.

Midterm and End-of-Term Academic Reports
Student grades are published at the mid point and at the end of each term.
At the midpoint of each term, instructors report on each student’s progress using the following scale: Passing (P), Low Passing (LP), Not Yet
Passing (NYP). At the midpoint of the fall and winter terms (Term 1 and Term 2), instructors also share written progress reports with students
and parent(s)/guardian(s).
At the end of each term, with the exception of courses graded on a pass-fail basis, all courses taken for credit are graded on the 0–6 scale
described below. At the end of the fall term (Term 1), instructors share written reports with students and parent(s)/guardian(s), and they do so
again at the end of the spring term (Term 3) for non-seniors.
6—Outstanding
5—Superior
4—Good

3—Satisfactory
2—Minimum Pass
(and minimum college
certifying grade)

1—Failure
0—Low Failure

If a student earns a 0 or 1 at the end of the term, the department chair and instructor will determine a course of action by which it would be
possible for the student to meet the minimum standards to earn a passing grade no higher than a 2. The student has the opportunity to earn
a passing grade at any point in the future. It should be noted, however, that a student may not be eligible to advance to the next course in a
sequence until a passing grade is earned, or the course is successfully repeated. The department will determine if and how the student can still
earn credit for the course sequence; the course of action will be outlined in the end-of-term instructor report. Please note that the opportunity
to raise a failing grade to a passing one has no relevance to a student’s standing or to the determination whether a student remains on track to
earn a diploma.
If a Senior fails a spring term course—even if the student passes the course for the year—the student may be allowed to participate in
Commencement but will receive a certificate of attendance rather than a diploma. The diploma will be awarded after Commencement, when all
coursework is completed as determined by the director of studies.

STUDENT SUPPORT
Adolescence is difficult, and during this extraordinary time in their lives, Phillips Academy students will constantly face new challenges—
demanding courses, high-level athletics, a variety of clubs and activities, the complexities of residential life, an ever-shifting set of social dynamics. We believe that through these challenges, students have the opportunity to learn and grow in numerous ways, and one of our goals at PA is to
support our students with a range of resources as they meet these challenges head-on, learn to be self-advocates, and experience their burgeoning independence. Along the way, many of our students will encounter moments when it is difficult for them to know how to navigate all of our
resources. At these times, it is the responsibility of the faculty to intercede and help students focus their energy and get to the point where they
are comfortable, confident, and ultimately successful. To do so, faculty and staff who are responsible for caring for students at Phillips Academy
may need to exchange personal and sensitive information about students with each other but will do so only if there is a need.

Faculty Processes and Actions for Supporting Students
In designing our faculty-driven processes for supporting individual students, we have configured the faculty in four ways. By doing so, we
recognize the value of the expertise and perspective of the faculty who work most directly with the student as well as those faculty who do not
work with the student at all.

Core Team
First, the Core Team consists of those faculty who are most immediately responsible for a student’s well-being: the primary house counselor
and/or advisor and the cluster dean.
At any time, in order to support a student, the members of a student’s Core Team can communicate and create a plan. The Core Team can recommend or require a student to attend a specific study center or to study in particular locations; to meet with teachers, counselors, academic
skills specialists, or other specific faculty members; to visit CAMD, the Brace Center, the Chaplaincy, or other appropriate offices; to work with
peer tutors; and/or to observe adjusted sign-in times on weekdays and/or weekends. The Core Team also may recommend or require other supportive measures to help a student. Missed appointments may result in unexcused absences.

Full Team
Second, the Full Team consists of all the adults who are working directly with a student during a specific term: the members of the Core Team as
well as all current teachers, and, if applicable, other members of the house counseling team, college counselor, Academic Skills specialist, coach,
and End-of-Term Review mentor. Recognizing that the constitution of the Full Team can change from term to term, a student may appoint an
additional faculty member to the Full Team.
Sometimes it makes sense for these people to gather to share observations and ideas during a Full Team Meeting. The Full Team can
implement any of the measures afforded the Core Team as well as limit a student’s permissions to leave campus or participate in on-campus
clubs or activities. When a meeting of a Full Team is scheduled, the entire faculty and the student are notified. Although only members of
the Full Team vote on proposed measures, any faculty member can join the meeting and contribute. The student’s cluster dean captures the
conversation and outlines measures in a letter addressed to the student and copied to parents/guardians.

9

Return to Table of Contents

Student Program Review Committee (SPRC)
Third, the SPRC consists of a small group of faculty members, including the five cluster deans and chaired by the director of studies and the
associate dean of students. This group offers a wider perspective and can implement any of the measures the Full Team might. In addition,
this group, in consultation with a student’s Full Team, may discuss and vote to modify the student’s academic program, including requiring a
student to take a particular course load or level, and/or limit a student’s other programmatic obligations, such as athletics. In consultation with
the student’s Full Team or the faculty members who meet with the student’s cluster dean, the SPRC may recommend that the End-of-Term
Review Committee consider additional measures. The cluster dean communicates any SPRC decision to the student and parents/guardians.

The End-of-Term Review Committee
Fourth, the End-of-Term Review Committee, chaired by the director of studies, provides a valuable perspective. The Committee meets at any
point during a term to discuss ways in which a particular student can find more success at Phillips Academy. In consultation with the SPRC,
the End-of-Term Review Committee may vote to offer a student our most formal support, End-of-Term Review.

End-of-Term Review Process
The End-of-Term Review process is meant to provide structure and support for students who have yet to fully meet the expectations of the
Academy. Through this process, we seek to acknowledge and addresses the underlying issues facing a student, which may include personal or
family hardships, social dynamics, academic skills work, health circumstances, or other concerns. Students who receive this formal support
are not alone in experiencing such difficulties, and most students leave the process and continue a successful career at Phillips Academy.
The formal supports of End-of-Term Review are intended to equip a student with proactive habits and mindsets for their ongoing success at
Phillips Academy. This is typically not an option for seniors in their spring term.
A student receiving the supports of End-of-Term Review chooses a faculty member to serve as a mentor and with whom they meet weekly
to discuss how things are going, to identify points of focus, to build a strong mentoring relationship, and to help the student navigate the
resources available to them. The director of studies will share other specific expectations in a letter addressed to the student and copied to the
parents/guardians.
At the conclusion of a term, the End-of-Term Review Committee will consider whether the student has demonstrated the habits and behaviors that reflect a willingness and ability to find success at this stage in their life at Phillips Academy. The Committee will consider a student’s
attendance, grades, progress in fulfilling diploma requirements, a personal written reflection, and the other specific expectations shared in the
letter from the director of studies. The Committee will then consider four options: remove the supports of End-of-Term Review, continue them,
require the student to take a leave of absence, or require the student to withdraw from Phillips Academy.
After a student has received the support of End-of-Term Review for at least one term, and in consultation with the SPRC the End-of-Term
Review Committee may decide that a student will benefit from a temporary separation from the Academy via a required leave of absence. The
details of such leaves are outlined on page 12.
A required leave of absence will normally be for at least the remainder of the academic year and possibly the following academic year. A student
who returns from a required leave of absence will typically receive the supports of the End-of-Term Review process.
After a student has received the support of End-of-Term Review for at least one term, and in consultation with the SPRC, the End-of-Term
Review Committee may require a student to withdraw from the Academy.

Student Response Team (SRT)
An additional group focused on the support of students is the SRT, which consists of the director of studies, dean of students, chief medical
officer, and director of psychological services. The SRT manages student concerns that require greater privacy and confidentiality, and it uses
the Essential Elements of Student Life to guide its decisions around student support, student leaves, and student returns. In its support of
students, the SRT may adjust a student’s academic, core, and extra-curricular program or may change a student’s residential status, among
other measures. The SRT documents its decisions in an official letter to the student and distributes copies to the parents/guardians.

Leaves of Absence
Sometimes issues can arise in the course of a student’s career at Phillips Academy that may interfere with the student’s ability to engage constructively in the business of learning. The Academy acknowledges that time away from campus can be important. Therefore, Phillips Academy
allows students to remain in good standing while taking the time they need to address important personal issues away from the school and
with their families.
A student and parents/guardians may request a leave of absence at any time and for a variety of reasons. The SRT will then determine whether
to grant the leave, the duration of the leave, and the conditions necessary for a student’s return.
As noted above, the End-of-Term Review Committee may require a student who has gone through the End-of-Term Review process to be
placed on a leave of absence. In addition, the members of SRT may require a student to be placed on a leave of absence. A required leave of
absence will normally be for at least the remainder of the academic year and possibly the following academic year. It is our experience that a
clearly defined and extended period of time permits students to focus, with their families, on the steps to be taken to regain their equilibrium
and to thrive.
1. A leave of absence may be required for medical reasons when, in order to ensure effective management or treatment of a medical problem,
a student must be away from the campus for a period of time. A leave may be required for a diagnostic evaluation or treatment, or it may
be initiated when a student’s presence on campus might jeopardize their own health or compromise the well-being of others.
2. A leave of absence will be required if it is determined, based upon an individualized assessment by the chief medical officer and/ or
a member of the psychological services team, in their professional judgment, a student has exhibited suicidal behavior or behavior
considered to be suicidal or otherwise potentially life-threatening, posing a risk of harm to the student and/or others.
3. A leave of absence may be required following any situation of egregious or repeated self-harm, including, but not limited to, substance
use, disordered eating, and/or self-injurious behavior.

10

Return to Table of Contents

4. A leave of absence may be required in cases in which a student is unable to meet the school’s Essential Elements of Student Life or in
cases in which the needs of a student cannot be met by the community or are interfering with the well-being of others. When a student is
unable to meet the school’s expectations (including non-compliance with a previously determined treatment plan), a leave of absence will
be required.
For all leaves of absence, the SRT will determine the duration of the leave and the conditions necessary for a student’s return (e.g., educational
activities, counseling, relevant assessments). The factors the SRT will consider in making these determinations are the student’s clinical needs
and safety; impact on the safety and well-being of the community; capacity to comply with the Essential Elements of Student Life; preparedness to meet the academic demands of the Academy; as well as the community’s ability to provide appropriate care.
A student’s return after a leave of absence is not automatic and depends upon the student meeting certain criteria specified by the SRT in
writing when the leave is granted. Approval for a return from any leave rests with the SRT. Any conditions or behavioral expectations placed on
a student upon return from a leave must be fully met. If they are not, the student will return to leave-of-absence status. A student who returns
from a required leave of absence will typically receive the supports of the End-of-Term Review process.

Academic Skills Center (ASC)
At the Academic Skills Center, specialists meet with students individually and in small group settings to teach strategies for organizing
work, managing time, and improving study skills using effective learning strategies. Any student may be referred to the ASC by their families,
instructors, or cluster deans, or they may self-refer. The ASC, located in Pearson Hall, is designed to supplement other existing support
services on campus. Although students may walk in and can use common study spaces, appointments are also available by emailing
academicskillscenter@andover.edu or through our ASC Canvas site, which has a short intake form.
The ASC also offers a Peer Tutor Program for courses in math, sciences, and languages. Because the Academy is a residential school, instructors
are widely available to students outside of class. The Academy does not endorse, nor will it make accommodations to support the use of outside
tutors, as outside tutors are not allowed on campus.

Peer Tutoring
Tutoring in individual courses is provided primarily through the Peer Tutor Program. Tutors are available in math, sciences, and languages
courses up to the 300 level.
Students qualified to help with work in specific courses are available to provide tutoring on a regular weekly basis. Peer tutors also are available
four evenings per week in the Math and Science Study Centers as well as the Writing Center for subject-specific support. Peer tutors are also
available for general study skills during Museum Study Hours on Wednesday and Thursday evenings. Students experiencing difficulty in a
particular course should first seek help from the instructor of that course—and continue to do so even when taking advantage of other support
resources on campus.

Study, Organizational, and Time Management Skills
When the need arises, ASC learning specialists meet individually with students to provide assistance with time management, organizational,
and study strategies.

Student Accessibility Services (SAS)
Student Accessibility Services, located within the Academic Skills Center in Pearson Hall, works with students who qualify as having a
disability under the Americans with Disabilities Act. This law defines disability as: “A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits a
major life activity; a record of such an impairment; or being regarded as having such an impairment.” Disabilities include, but are not limited
to, mobility and orthopedic impairments, sensory impairments, psychological disorders, chronic health impairments, and learning disabilities.
In accordance with such, and with our belief in the importance of creating a supportive and accessible environment, Phillips Academy is committed to making reasonable accommodations for students with documented disabilities, to ensure equal access to the educational program.

Reasonable Accommodations
Students with diagnosed and properly documented disabilities may be eligible to receive reasonable accommodations through SAS.
Accommodations are designed to reduce or eliminate any disadvantage that may exist due to the individual’s disability and permit an otherwise
qualified individual access to all of the Academy’s programs, without fundamentally altering either the essential elements of the curriculum or
residential life, or other graduation requirements.
Students requesting accommodations of either an academic or residential need must present appropriate documentation from a certified
professional indicating how the disability substantially limits one or more major life activities, including learning. Documentation assists the
Academy in understanding the extent to which a disability may impact a student, allowing us to make consistent, informed decisions about
student accommodations. Requests are reviewed on a case-by-case basis. Please be aware that policies regarding the granting of accommodations vary from school to school, and the provision of accommodations in a previous educational setting does not guarantee that they will also
be approved at Phillips Academy.
Please note that while a request for accommodations may be initiated at any time during the school year, indicating a need for accommodations
prior to June 1 permits the Academy to consider the request in a timely manner, ensuring that a student’s adjustment to learning and living at
Phillips Academy goes as smoothly as possible. Implementation times may vary depending on the nature of the accommodation needed, and
academic accommodations cannot be applied retroactively.
Students and families who wish to request accommodations should carefully review the Academy documentation guidelines and
timelines for implementation, available on The Hive’s Student Support page. Students or their families may also email
studentaccessibilityservices@andover.edu.

11

Return to Table of Contents

Standardized Testing Accommodations
Student Accessibility Services may assist qualified students in applying for accommodations on standardized tests through the College Board
(PSAT, SAT, SAT Subject Tests, and AP exams) and the ACT. Parental consent is required to release information to the testing agencies.
Additional information—including timelines and documentation requirements for requesting accommodations for standardized tests—is
available on The Hive. Please note that the Academy’s documentation requirements for accommodations may differ from those for external
agencies.

P LANNING AN ACADEMI C PROGRAM
The Educational Program
Phillips Academy’s educational program comprises academic, athletic, and community dimensions. The Course of Study explains the required
elements of the academic program and works in conjunction with The Blue Book, which describes the opportunities, requirements, responsibilities, and expectations associated with these different elements.

General Description
The educational program and its associated policies and expectations may change at any time. This document as written does not limit the
authority of the Academy to alter its policies and procedures to suit any changed circumstances. As appropriate, significant changes made after
the publication of this document will be communicated to students and parents as they occur.

The Curriculum
The diploma requirements, chosen and voted on by the entire faculty as essential elements of an educational program, are designed to ensure
that Phillips Academy graduates successfully complete a course of study in a broad range of disciplines and skills that, in the judgment of the
faculty, provide the appropriate foundation for a liberal education. The requirements are further specified as to skill level and content by the
academic divisions and departments, with the oversight of the Academic Council. Certain requirements vary in keeping with the length of time
a student attends the Academy.
Topics, texts, and materials occasionally may not win the full approval of all students or parents. However, they will be selected carefully and
thoughtfully within our academic departments, then presented and considered in managed contexts. Parental objections to course materials or
requests for teacher changes will not be considered in the scheduling process.

Placement of Newly Admitted Students
Students entering their first year receive placement materials, including forms for present teachers to complete and self-administered diagnostic assessments in mathematics, music, and world languages. These items are used by the Academy to aid in proper placement or recommendation of course levels. In order to ensure proper placement, students should not use outside resources on the placement tests. New students also
are asked to complete to the best of their ability a course request form indicating the courses they wish to take during the coming year.
In some subjects, such as English, course-level placement aligns directly with grade level. Thus, all 9th-graders take English 100. In other subjects, such as mathematics, placement is independent of grade level and depends instead on background and placement tests.
Grade levels at Andover have unusual names: 9th-graders are called Juniors, 10th-graders are called Lowers, 11th-graders are called Uppers,
and 12th-graders and postgraduates are Seniors.

Course Requests
The student and the advisor together make or confirm course requests for the upcoming term and review long-term plans. Student course schedules are published no later than the day before classes begin, and the process for requesting to change, drop, or add a course is described on Page 5.
The Academy does not accept requests for specific teachers or periods.

Course Load
Phillips Academy’s academic program is based upon the premise that students are capable of studying independently, responsibly, and with
self-direction. During junior and lower year, students take five or six courses as deemed appropriate by the student’s advisor, and in accordance
with the six-course load policy and course availability. During upper and senior year, students typically carry five courses each term. During
senior year, students may take four courses if the course load satisfies the four-course load policy.
The Academy’s medical director and/or the Student Response Team (SRT) may recommend or require a reduced course load (fewer than five
courses) for health-related reasons. The Student Program Review Committee (SPRC) also may approve or require a reduced course load.
Over the span of their final two years, students are required to accumulate a minimum of 27 term credits, with a minimum of 12 graded term
credits during their senior year.

Six-Course Load Policy
Because of staffing, class size, and scheduling considerations, and out of concern for student health and well-being, the Academy does not
accommodate all requests to take six courses. When a student requests to take six courses in any given term, approval will be guided by the
following principles:
Requests to take a sixth course will only be considered after every student has been scheduled into a full course load of five courses. Space,
staffing, and schedule conflicts may prevent a student from adding a sixth course to their schedule. In order to enable scheduling of diploma
requirement courses in the arts, Juniors and Lowers are typically approved to take six courses, though some students may be required to take

12

Return to Table of Contents

five. New lowers may only take PHD200 as a sixth course in their first term. New Uppers, Seniors, and PGs may take only five courses in their
first term. Five courses is the expected course load for students conducting independent projects. (An independent project counts as a course.)
For returning Uppers and Seniors approval to take a sixth course will be granted if (a) the student has earned at least a 5 average in the previous term and has no incomplete grades*, or (b) the sixth course is MUS900–906 (ensembles for credit) or PHD200 (Physical Education), or
the student has approval of the chair of the Department of Theatre and Dance to take THD900–924 (a performance-based course) as a sixth
course. In all other instances, the Advising Council will determine which students will be approved to carry a six-course load. Only in rare
circumstances will a student with a grade of 3 or lower in a continuing course, or a grade of 2 or lower in any course, be approved to take six
courses the following term.
A six-course load is conditional upon a satisfactory record at the midterm. Any student enrolled in six courses and earning a grade of Low Pass
(LP) or Not Yet Passing (NYP) at the midterm will likely be required to drop a course. Thus, all students taking six courses must understand
they may be required to drop a course after the midterm despite having done the work in that course for half of a term. Additionally, the
Student Program Review Committee (SPRC), or the Student Response Team (SRT) may, at any time, and in consultation with a student’s core
or Full Team, require a student to drop a sixth course.

Four-Course Load Policy
In the senior year, a four-course load will be approved if the student’s advisor and college counselor support the proposed program and the
course load is consistent with what the student indicated on all college applications. The course load must be consistent with all college applications, not just applications for the schools to which the student has been admitted.
If a student indicated on any college application that they would take five or more courses in a particular term, then they will be expected to
take that course load, regardless of whether a college to which they have been admitted gives approval for the student to take four courses.
The Academy’s medical director and/or the Student Response Team (SRT) may recommend or require a reduced course load (fewer than five
courses) for health-related reasons. The Student Program Review Committee (SPRC) also may approve or require a reduced course load.
In the senior year, a four-course load will be approved if:
1. Three of the four courses in the proposed program are designated as advanced* courses,
2. The student’s advisor and college counselor support the proposed program, and
3. The course load is consistent with what the student indicated on all college
applications. **
*All 500- and 600-level courses are considered advanced. Some 400-level and some 900-level performance courses also are designated as
advanced as determined by individual departments.
**The course load must be consistent with all college applications, not just applications for the schools to which the student has been admitted.
If a student indicated on any college application that they would take five or more courses in a particular term, then they will be expected to
take that course load, regardless of whether a college to which they have been admitted gives approval for the student to take four courses.
The Academy’s medical director and/or the Student Response Team (SRT) may recommend or require a reduced course load (fewer than five
courses) for health-related reasons. The Student Program Review Committee (SPRC) also may approve or require a reduced course load.

Course Enrollments & Cancellations
The school sometimes cannot offer certain planned courses or must change the term in which they are offered due to student enrollment or
staffing limitations. A course with low enrollment may be canceled at any time up to the third day of classes. Likewise, the school has the right
to restrict enrollment in any course when sign-ups exceed the departmentally determined course capacity.

Independent Projects
The Abbot Independent Scholars Program (AISP) provides selected seniors an opportunity to work independently with a faculty mentor for
course credit. Each project is graded on the standard 0–6 scale by the supervising faculty mentor. Additional information on the AISP and its
application process is available on PAnet.

Participation in Off-Campus Programs
To participate in Learning in the World or other Academy-sanctioned off-campus programs, as well as independent projects, students must be
in good standing from a disciplinary perspective and must be meeting all Essential Elements of student life as outlined elsewhere in The Blue
Book. The Academy has an established a Student Group Travel Policy, which outlines expectations and protocols applicable to all Academysponsored student travel.

13

Return to Table of Contents

GENE RA L I NFOR MATI ON
The Educational Program
Phillips Academy’s educational program comprises academic, athletic, and community dimensions. The Blue Book describes the opportunities, requirements, responsibilities, and expectations associated with these different elements. The Course of Study describes the required
elements of the educational program and includes the course catalog.

Diploma Requirements
The basic diploma requirement is the satisfactory completion of a four-year secondary school program, with the senior year at Andover.
The student must be in good standing (not on probation or under suspension) at the time of graduation. A student who has been dismissed
is ineligible for a diploma unless readmitted.
To be eligible for a diploma, all students must satisfy the Department of Physical Education’s swimming requirement. Certain diploma
requirements vary with the class level at which the student enters Phillips Academy. Entering Juniors and Lowers must pass Physical
Education 200 and a one-term course offered by the Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies (usually taken in the lower year).
Some modifications of the language requirement are made for entering Seniors. Entering Seniors with no previous world language experience must pass one year in a world language.
Students are subject to the following diploma requirements in the visual and performing arts:
• Entering Juniors must earn no fewer than four credits (combined) in art, music, and theatre and dance, with at least one credit each in
art and music. Most students complete one credit in art and one credit in music by the end of their junior year.
• Entering Lowers must earn no fewer than three credits (combined) in art, music, and theatre and dance, with at least one credit each in
art and music.
• Entering Uppers need to pass one term of either art or music at the Academy.
Additional details about the manner in which these requirements are to be fulfilled can be found in the opening descriptions of the departments.
Term credits required for the diploma (including credits earned prior to enrolling at Andover) are:
54 for entering Juniors/9th
51 for entering Lowers/10th
48 for entering Uppers/11th
48 for entering Seniors/12th
During their upper and senior years, students must accumulate a minimum of 27 term credits, with a minimum of 12 graded term credits
during senior year. Approved Independent Projects are counted as graded courses.

14

Return to Table of Contents

The following table shows a summary of diploma requirements. Additional details about the manner in which these requirements are to be
fulfilled can be found in the opening descriptions of the departments.

Art, Music,
Theatre & Dance

4-year student

3-year student

2-year student

1-year student

1 art, 1 music, plus
2 more of art, music,
and/or theatre and dance

1 art, 1 music, and
1 more art, music,
or theatre and dance

1 art or 1 music

None

English
English 100, 200, and 300 English 200 and 300
English 301 and 3 terms
			at 500-level
World Languages†

History &
Social Science

Completion at Phillips
Academy of 3 terms of 300level, OR 1 term of 400-level
or above, OR completion of
200-level of one language
and 100-level of another language, as long as at least one
of the two is designated a less
commonly taught language.*

Completion at Phillips
Academy of 3 terms of 300level, OR 1 term of 400-level
or above, OR completion of
200-level of one language
and 100-level of another language, as long as at least one
of the two is designated a less
commonly taught language.*

Completion at Phillips
Academy of 3 terms of
300-level, OR 1 term of
400-level or above, OR 6
terms any world language.

History 100A and 100B
History 201 in 10th grade
History 300*
in 9th grade, History 201
and History 300		
and 202 in 10th grade.			
and History 300			

3 terms***

If student does not have 3
years of previous high school
language study, a 3-term
sequence of any language†

If no prior credit for
U.S. history, then 1 year:
History 300 or 320
plus an additional term

Lab Science
Two 3-term lab sciences
		
		
		

Two 3-term lab sciences
(including yearlong
lab sciences taken at
previous high school)

Two 3-term lab sciences
(including yearlong
lab sciences taken at
previous high school)

Two 3-term lab sciences
(including yearlong
lab sciences taken at
previous high school)

Math

Completion of
Math 280 or 340

Completion of
Math 280 or 340

Completion of
Math 280 or 340

Placement at 500-level
or higher course or Math 400

Philosophy &
Religious Studies

1 term (10th grade unless
granted an exception)

1 term

None

None

Physical Education

1 term (10th grade)

1 term (10th grade)

25-Yard
Swim Assessment††

Completed during term of
PHD200

Completed during term of
PHD200

Completed during new
student orientation

Completed during new
student orientation

* Less commonly taught languages are Chinese, German, Ancient Greek, Japanese, and Russian. Students must have the division head’s
approval to pursue this “2+1” option.
** If given credit by the department chair for a U.S. history course taken previously in 11th or 12th grade, then three terms must be taken of other
courses in the department.
*** One-year international students must take English 498 and 499, and most PGs must take one term of English 495.
† Students who place above the 300 level are not automatically excused from our language requirement; they must validate their proficiency
through at least one term of study at Phillips Academy at the 400 level or above. Please consult with the Dean of Studies Office for details. See
page 95 for more information about diploma requirements in world languages.
†† Students who are unable to pass the 25-yard swim test must work with the PE department to determine a path to completing this diploma
requirement.

15

Return to Table of Contents

P LANNING A P ROGRA M OF STUDY AT A NDOV ER
The following is designed to help Andover students and their parents understand the curriculum and to show the major decisions (and their
consequences) that face students at each stage of the four-year academic program.
At various stages of their program, it may be advisable for students to take standardized tests such as the PSAT, SAT, ACT, and Advanced
Placement (AP) Exams. Students should consult with their teachers, advisor, and the College Counseling Office regarding the appropriate
time to take these assessments.

Junior Year
Each term a Junior must take five or six courses. Most Juniors take six courses two of their three terms, often completing three courses in the
arts. A Junior’s program typically will include the following courses:
Arts

Introductory Art (ART225) and Introductory Music (by placement) (2 terms)
In addition, many Juniors will take one or two additional courses in the arts (art, music, or theatre and
dance) or elective courses in other departments.

English

ENG100 (3 terms)

History

HSS100A and HSS100B (2 terms)

Mathematics

Enter the sequence by placement of the department and take 3 terms

Science

Most Juniors take biology or physics; other routes are possible depending on math placement (3 terms)

World Language

Enter the sequence by placement of the department (often at 100-level), and take 3 terms

Lower Year
Each term a Lower may take five or six courses. (See the Course of Study for the policy on six-course loads.) Most Lowers take six courses
during the term they take Physical Education.
A Lower’s program typically will include the following courses:

New Students
Arts

A 300-level art course or a theatre and dance course (1 term)
Introductory music, by placement (1 term)

English

ENG200 (3 terms)

History

HSS201 (1 term)

Mathematics

Enter the sequence by placement of the department (3 terms typically)

Physical Education

PHD200 (1 term)

Science

One 3-term lab science (Chemistry or Physics)

World Language

Enter the sequence by placement of the department (3 terms)

Returning Students
English

ENG200 (3 terms)

History

HSS201 and HSS202 (2 terms)

Mathematics

Continue the sequence (3 terms typically)

Phil/Religious Studies

A 300-level course in philosophy and religious studies (1 term)

Physical Education

PHD200 (1 term)

Science

One 3-term lab science (Chemistry or Physics)

World Language

Continue the sequence (3 terms)

In addition, some Lowers will take additional courses in the arts (art, music, or theatre and dance) or elective courses in other departments.
Lowers seeking alternate programs of study (e.g., two languages, two sciences) should consult with the Dean of Studies Office.

Upper Year
During the Upper and Senior years, a student must accumulate a minimum of 27 credits. Each term an Upper must take five courses.
(Occasionally it is appropriate for an Upper to take six courses—see the Course of Study for the policy on six-course loads.)
A student wishing to participate in an approved off-campus program during all or part of the Upper year should discuss these plans with
their advisor and consult the Dean of Studies Office for guidance with their course plan.

16

Return to Table of Contents

An Upper’s program will typically include the following courses:

New Students
English

ENG301 (3 terms)

History

Usually HSS300. This may be taken senior year. (3 terms)

Mathematics

Enter the sequence by placement of the department (3 terms, typically)

Science or other elective

Art, computer science, history, another mathematics, another language, music,
philosophy and religious studies, theatre/dance, or interdisciplinary (3 terms, typically)

World Language

Enter the sequence by placement of the department (3 terms)

New Uppers may consult with our college counseling office prior to arriving on campus for guidance in planning their program of study.

Returning Students
English

ENG300 (3 terms)

History

Usually HSS300. This may be taken senior year. (3 terms)

Mathematics

Continue the sequence (3 terms, typically)

Science or other elective

Art, computer science, history, another mathematics, another language, music,
philosophy and religious studies, theatre/dance, or interdisciplinary (3 terms, typically)

World Language

Continue the sequence (3 terms, typically)

Senior Year
Seniors are expected to take five courses each term. (Occasionally it is appropriate for a Senior to take four or six courses; see the Course of
Study for policies on four- and six-course loads.)
During the Upper and Senior years, a student must accumulate a minimum of 27 credits. A credit equals one course taken for one term. A
Senior must earn a minimum of 12 graded term credits during the senior year. Seniors must have passing term grades for all courses taken
during their spring term in order to graduate. New students, including international students, should pay particular attention to the introductory paragraphs for the English and history sections of this document.
A Senior’s program typically includes the following courses:

New Students
English

As placed by the department (3 terms)

Mathematics

Enter the sequence by placement of the department (3 terms)

World Language

Enter the sequence by placement of the department if the requirement is not yet satisfied (3 terms)

Other Courses

In addition, new Seniors typically take courses in art, computer science, another English or
history, mathematics, music, philosophy and religious studies, science, classics, or theatre/dance

Returning Students
Returning Seniors must be sure to take any remaining courses needed to meet diploma requirements. Careful selection of electives for continued depth in the student’s chosen areas is encouraged. Two-year students must take English electives at the 500 level each term.

Course Enrollments & Cancellations
The school sometimes cannot offer certain planned courses or must change the term in which they are offered due to student enrollment
or staffing limitations. A course with low enrollment may be canceled at any time up to the third day of classes. Likewise, the school has the
right to restrict enrollment in any course when sign-ups exceed the departmentally determined course capacity.

Course Numbers
The first digit corresponds to the “level” of the course. The second and third digits, and any appended letters, reflect organization schemes at
the departmental level.
• Level 1 = 100; for courses that introduce a subject (SPA100) or that are typically taken by Juniors (BIO100, ENG100)
• Level 2 = 200; for courses that are the second level in a sequence (SPA200) or courses that are typically taken by Lowers or Juniors
(ART225, HSS201)
• Level 3 = 300; for courses that are the third level in a sequence (SPA300), or for courses that are appropriate for Uppers (ENG300)
or for Juniors, Lowers, and Uppers (PHR300, CHM300), or for courses with assumed prior experience (ART3XX)
• Level 4 = 400; for courses that are the fourth level in a sequence, or for courses that are appropriate for Uppers and Seniors (but do not
qualify for the 500 or 600 designations)

17

Return to Table of Contents

• Level 5 = 500; for courses equivalent to college freshman classes, sometimes, but not always, indicated by explicit preparation for an
AP exam
• Level 6 = 600; for courses that would typically be taken by majors in the subject in college, or for courses typically taken after the first
year of college
• Performance-based credit = 900; for course credit associated with performance in music or theatre and dance

Key to Course Designations
The designations T1, T2, and T3 indicate the term during which the course is offered: T1 = Fall; T2 = Winter; T3 = Spring. Carefully check
each course description for any other limitations: prerequisites, permission of the instructor or the department chair required, etc.

18

Return to Table of Contents

A RT
The visual arts program emphasizes artistic thinking and the development of creative thinking in relation to the techniques of a medium,
history of visual ideas, and expressive potential of one’s own experience and culture. Students have the opportunity to explore particular
areas in depth on both the introductory and advanced levels.

Diploma Requirements in Art
• Entering Juniors must earn no fewer than a total of four credits in art, music, and theatre and dance, with at least one credit each in art
and music. Those who enter as Juniors should complete one credit in music and one credit in art by the end of their junior year.
• New Lowers must earn no fewer than three credits in art, music, and theatre and dance, with at least one credit each in art and music.
• New Uppers must take at least one term of either art or music.
• New Seniors have no diploma requirement in music but are encouraged to take at least one term of art, music, or theatre.

Art Placements
• Students who matriculated as Juniors should take ART225 by the end of junior year, which qualifies them for any 300-level art elective.
Juniors with a strong background in art may seek permission from the department chair to enroll directly in a 300-level art elective
chosen in consultation with the chair. Placement in 300-level courses is granted based on a student’s previous coursework and a portfolio
of recent art.
• Students who matriculated as Lowers should enroll in a 300-level art elective during their lower year to fulfill the diploma requirement.
• Students who matriculated as Uppers can fulfill their diploma requirement in the visual and performing arts by completing a 300-level
art elective. Moving directly into 500-level electives requires the permission of the instructor and the department chair. Permission is
granted based on a student’s previous coursework and a portfolio of recent art.
• Juniors who are unable to take ART225 during their junior year may enroll in any 300-level art elective in their lower year. As four-year
students, they still must complete the four-term Arts requirement to graduate.
• Entering Seniors and PGs have no diploma requirement in art. They may take any 300- or 400-level elective. Moving directly into
500-level electives requires the permission of the instructor and the department chair. Permission is granted based on a student’s previous
coursework and a portfolio of recent art.
• Entering students considering ART600 (Advanced Studio Art: Self-Directed Studio Practice) should check prerequisites or consult
with the department chair and their advisor to plan a program that includes at least two art electives beyond the diploma requirement,
for a total of three studio art classes. Students who are not able to complete all three studio prerequisites can request permission from
the instructor and the department chair to enroll in the class. Permission will be granted based on a student’s previous coursework, a
portfolio of recent work, and evidence of ability to work independently.

Visual Studies for Juniors
Visual Studies
ART225
(T1, T2, T3)

For Juniors. Visual Studies focuses on artistic thinking, visual vocabulary, visual literacy, and the relationship of making and thinking. Why
do humans create? And how? Projects, discussions, and visits to the Addison Gallery of American Art and Peabody Institute of Archaeology
focus students on their own creative work and what they perceive in the world around them. Students use a range of media (such as drawing,
collage, photography, video, or clay) to expand their perceptual, conceptual, and technical skills, and develop the visual language needed
to communicate their experiences and ideas. Although their work is substantially assessed throughout the term and successful completion
of the course will be portfolio based, students do not receive a numerical grade in ART225. At the end of term, their academic report will
indicate “Pass” or “Fail.” Juniors who complete ART225 are eligible to take any of the 300-level art electives.

300-Level Electives
Students who have successfully completed a 300-level elective are eligible to take other 300-level electives or the corresponding 500-level
elective.

Clay and the Ancestral Pot
ART302
(T1, T2, T3)

This course explores ceramics from a variety of perspectives, including archaeology, geology, and studio art. As a studio class, students
will experiment with a range of hand-building techniques while answering studio assignments. The aesthetics of form and surface will be
a principle focus. In addition, this class will investigate clay from the perspective of geology, archaeology, and human evolution. Visits to
examine the Peabody Institute of Archaeology’s collection will offer historical context and a rich array of objects to frame class discussions
and assignments. Students who complete ART302 are eligible to take other 300-level art electives or ART502. (Mr. Zaeder)
Prerequisite: Juniors must have completed ART225.

19

Return to Table of Contents

3D Design Fundamentals
ART303
(T1, T2, T3)

Humans exist in space bound by the rules of three dimensions. In this class, students will explore the spatial relationships of art and our surroundings. Creative experimentation and discovery will be a key grounding principle of this class as students learn various ways of translating their ideas from two-dimensional form to three-dimensional object. Because three-dimensional form takes shape in varied fine arts and
commercial spaces and embodies multiple mediums, this class will move through projects that employ both traditional techniques as well as
explore newer technologies like 3D printing and computer assisted design. (Mr. Smith)
Prerequisite: Juniors must have completed ART225.

Drawing I: Methods and Materials
ART304
(T1, T2, T3)

Drawing is fundamentally about learning how to see and how to translate that vision onto paper through a variety of mark-making techniques. Through in-class exercises and formal assignments, students learn the language of drawing and develop skills relating to contour,
gesture, and fully rendered compositions. Course concepts include the depiction of three-dimensional form on a two-dimensional plane,
use of light and dark contrast, and sighting. Assignments are designed to develop students’ skills in drawing representationally from direct
observation and to encourage creative and expressive thinking. Students who successfully complete ART304 are eligible to take other 300level art electives or ART505. (Ms. Avalos, Ms. Silva)
Prerequisite: Juniors must have completed ART225.

Painting I: Paint, Palette, and Process
ART305
(T1, T2, T3)

Develop skills with the basic elements of painting in acrylics as you explore different approaches to generate ideas for paintings. Learn how
dots become complex abstract compositions or how the game of Pictionary prompts surreal spaces. Working from both the imagination and
observation, specific projects are assigned to facilitate the study of fundamental paint handling, color mixing, and blending. Issues of form
and space relationships, composition, and development of ideas are addressed in balance with the student’s desire for self-expression. Class
critiques and visits to the Addison Gallery of American Art complement the actual painting process. Students who successfully complete
ART305 are eligible to take other 300-level art electives or ART505. (Ms. Avalos)
Prerequisite: Juniors must have completed ART225.

Film Photography: Exploring 18th- and 19th-Century Photographic Praxis
ART306
(T2, T3)

This companion course in black-and-white analog photography concentrates on the use of 35mm cameras and chemical processing.
Students are instructed in proper camera use, basic film exposure, and darkroom familiarity. Weekly meetings are divided into lab and
classroom sessions. In the lab, students learn the fundamental tools and techniques of a traditional darkroom; in the classroom, students
present their work to gain a fuller understanding of photography as a medium of expression and storytelling. Students can expect to examine
the invention of photography and the “flaneur” tradition of 35mm photography as exemplified in the work of artists such as Henri CartierBresson, Helen Levitt, Robert Frank, and many others. Film cameras will be provided for students to explore light-sensitive silver materials.
Laboratory instruction in printing fine art images with variable contrast filters will be provided. (Mr. Membreño-Canales)
Prerequisite: Juniors must have completed ART225.

Printmaking: Beyond the Matrix
ART307
(T2, T3)

Traditional printmaking is a process based on transferring images from one surface onto another. Most often prints are made on two
dimensional surfaces like paper or fabric. Printmaking techniques can be applied to forms of various shape, size, and function. In this
class, students will explore the core concepts of printmaking utilizing traditional analog tools as well as more contemporary digital printing
techniques. Adobe Illustrator, laser etching, and linocuts are tools, processes, and skills that will be added to their creative toolkit. Discovery
and process-based learning will be the major focus of the class as students explore ways of developing their ideas and transferring them into
printed form. (Ms. Avalos)
Prerequisites: Juniors must have completed ART225.

Graphic Design
ART308
(T1, T2, T3)

Design shapes how we see and experience information. Those who visually communicate through design have the opportunity to shape
the meaning of the images we consume. This course not only addresses the formal, sensory, conceptual, and technical aspects of design, it
also encourages students to consider the ethics and design history that have shaped our contemporary visual experiences. Students will use
design thinking principles and real-world scenarios to create pieces that will be shared with their communities. Students who complete
ART308 are eligible to take other 300-level art electives or ART508. (Mr. Smith)
Prerequisite: Juniors must have completed ART225.

20

Return to Table of Contents

Video I
ART309
(T1, T2, T3)

Students will consider the broad scope of the video medium in daily life as well as its role in art, popular culture, and journalism. Students
will shoot and edit their own video works throughout the term. Class time will include viewing and discussing historical and contemporary
film and video work as well as giving feedback on completed student projects. Projects will explore techniques and ideas around basic shooting and editing, post-production effects as well as narrative, truth, and fiction. Cameras will be provided by the Polk-Lillard Center. Students
who successfully complete ART309 are eligible to take other 300-level art electives or ART509. (Ms. Pinkowski)
Prerequisite: Juniors must have completed ART225.

Digital Photography I: Appreciating Light, Color, and Time
ART310
(T1 , T2, T3)

In this introductory digital photography course, students will examine the concept of beauty in the environment and how an audience may
appreciate the poetic and contemplative experience of a photograph. Small projects each week enable students to exercise a number of the
creative controls in good camerawork using DSLR cameras. Students will be guided through a workflow process in the Polk-Lillard Center to
adapt to a regular photographic practice. Non-destructive editing, adjustments, retouching, and composite imagery also will be explored as
will introductory studio lighting. Students will have the opportunity to edit from each small project to construct small print and digital portfolios by term’s end. Loaner DSLR cameras are available through the Polk-Lillard Center, or students may use their personal DSLRs. Students
who successfully complete ART310 are eligible for ART306 or ART510 or any other 300-level art elective. (Mr. Membreño-Canales)
Prerequisite: Juniors must have completed ART225.

400-Level Electives
Visual Culture: Curating the Addison Collection
ART400
(T2)

Students enrolled in ART400 will explore the photography collection of the Addison Gallery of American Art in order to design a collaborative exhibition. This course will guide students through the curatorial process, from object selection and research to label writing
and exhibition design, as well as give them a foundation in historical, cultural, and aesthetic understandings of photography. Students will
engage deeply with the Addison’s collection and staff members, participate in discussions of readings, and work collaboratively with their
peers. Students will walk away from this unique class having co-curated an exhibition with their community in mind and having developed
important, transferable visual literacy skills.
Prerequisite: Open to all Lowers, Uppers, and Seniors

Histories of Art
ART444 (may be taken as an Art or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ART444)
ART445 (may be taken as an Art or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ART445)
ART446 (may be taken as an Art or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ART446)
(T1, T2, T3)

Michelangelo’s David. A 12-second TikTok. The Rothko Chapel. Video of violence committed by a representative of the State. O’Keeffe’s Flowers.
Images constantly and incessantly bombard us, yet how do we process, deconstruct, and understand them? How do we place them in larger
cultural, political, and social contexts? How do we wallow in beauty and magnificence? How do we discern a variety of meanings and best
ensure we are not victims of ideology?
In this three-term interdisciplinary course, students explore images and objects as primary sources unveiling the values and ideas of the
society in which they were produced, and they pay particular attention to the effects of class, economics, gender, national identity, politics,
race, religion, sexual orientation, technology, and urbanism on art and visual culture. By focusing on both form and context, students foster
a visual literacy that serves them well for a lifetime. Although the course focuses primarily on the traditional “fine” arts, students develop the
skills and dispositions to navigate varied elements of contemporary visual culture, including TikToks and amateur videos.
ART441/ART444, Term 1—The term begins with art as mimesis—as representation of “reality”—in Greece and concludes with its further
development during the Renaissance in Italy and Northern Europe. Along the way, students encounter creators such as Praxitiles, Giotto,
and Leonardo and explore many topics, including: the development of organized labor, the economics of the Medici Bank, the evolution of
the social status of some creators from craftsman to artist, the devastation of the Black Death, the gendering of different media (tapestries
versus sculpture, for example), and the power of monarchy and papacy.
ART442/ART445, Term 2—The term stretches from the Reformation through Impressionism, and students examine themes throughout,
including the evolving tension over the obscuring of boundaries between the wonders of art and the wonders of nature; the gradual shift of
sovereignty from pope and king to individual and from patron to artist; the development of photography; the prevalence of rape imagery;
the changes in social regulation, spectacle, and exhibition; and the rise of “globalism” in London and Paris. Students study artists such as
Caravaggio, Rembrandt, Bonheur, Courbet, and Monet.
ART443/ART446, Term 3—The term covers the end of the 19th century to the present day, and students encounter a range of artists,
including: Paul Cézanne, Pablo Picasso, Käthe Kollwitz, Jackson Pollock, Andy Warhol, Cindy Sherman, El Anatsui, and Banksy. Among
other topics, students explore the fragmentation and disappearance of mimetic art, the global catastrophes of depression and war, the development of “American Art,” the feminist art movement and the challenges of intersectionality, the solidification of art as commodity—the
economics of the contemporary art market and the politics of museum display—and the postmodern dismantling of the Eurocentric tradition that permeates contemporary visual culture. (Mr. Fox)
Prerequisite: Open to Lowers, Uppers, and Seniors, who may take one, two, or three terms.

21

Return to Table of Contents

500-Level Electives
Ceramics II
ART502
(T2, T3)

This course is designed for students who have completed Clay and The Ancestral Pot (ART302) and wish to continue their study of ceramics.
As an advanced course, students will be asked to expand on their existing knowledge of ceramics, strengthen their technical skills, and seek
sophisticated solutions to given assignments. In addition to their own work in the studio, students can expect to pursue some research and
inquiry into the work of contemporary ceramic artists. Outside reading and visits to the Peabody Institute of Archaeology also will be a part
of the course. This class can be taken more than once. (Mr. Zaeder)
Prerequisite: ART302; Open to Lowers, Uppers, and Seniors only. Juniors may only enroll in 300-level electives.

Advanced Drawing, Painting, and Mixed Media
ART505
(T2, T3)

This course builds on the knowledge and skills developed in Drawing I and/or Painting I, while helping students find and express their
artistic voice through one medium or a combination of 2D media. ART505 focuses on thematic subjects and continues to stress the
development of concepts and skills. Using painting or drawing, students can create artworks from both the imagination and observation to
broaden their definition of what painting or drawing can be. For those students interested in mixed media, they can combine traditional or
experimental drawing or painting methods with collage and other techniques. During this course, students are encouraged to design their
own projects and to build a portfolio of their artworks. Critiques and virtual visits to the Addison Gallery of American Art are important
components of this course. This class can be taken more than once. (Ms. Silva)
Prerequisite: ART304 or ART305; Open to Lowers, Uppers, and Seniors only. Juniors may only enroll in 300-level electives.

Graphic Design II
ART508
(T3)

This course is divided into two parts: practical design application and personal projects. We will begin the course by examining the practices
of designers working in today’s market. This includes engaging with visiting designers and illustrators and creating work for a real client.
Part two of this class is dedicated to exploring one’s emerging design aesthetic using a breadth of digital media. Students pitch and create
their personal projects, which can range from branding to book illustrations. (Mr. Smith)
Prerequisite: ART308. Open to Lowers, Uppers, and Seniors only. Juniors may only enroll in 300-level electives.

Video II: Special Topics in Video
ART509
(T3)

This course gives students a chance to more deeply investigate areas of video introduced in ART309. Topics of term-long focus will include
the video essay, documentary/journalism, and animation/experimental video. Students will have the opportunity to pursue their own interests within the given topic. Class time will include viewing historical and contemporary work in film and video, technical workshops, and
feedback sessions on one another’s projects. This class may be taken more than once. In certain academic years this course may meet during
the same period as ART309. (Ms. Pinkowski)
Prerequisite: ART309; Open to Lowers, Uppers, and Seniors only. Juniors may only enroll in 300-level electives.

Photography II: The Advanced Photographic Portfolio
ART510
(T3)

A companion course to ART306 or ART310, this course will exercise students’ working knowledge of DSLR workflow and nondestructive
editing. This advanced photography opportunity is designed for students who wish to go deeper in the development and tightly edited
execution of a self-motivated thematic photography portfolio. Additionally, there will be demonstrations on creating and printing from
digital negatives and some advanced studio lighting work. Editorial guidance in the production of a well-defined project will be provided for
print, installation, digital, and/or e-book portfolios. Project work may include case studies; interdisciplinary or small group research topics
are encouraged. This class can be taken more than once. (Mr. Membreño-Canales)
Prerequisite: ART306 or ART310; Open to Lowers, Uppers, and Seniors only. Juniors may only enroll in 300-level electives.

Advanced Digital Art
ART520
(T2)

This advanced studio course will challenge students to answer broad thematic and conceptual assignments utilizing their pre-existing digital
skillset. Teacher and student-led workshop opportunities will further facilitate learning and skill advancement across a variety of digital
platforms. Exposure to a wide array of digitally based art forms and means of expression will be a grounding focus of the course.
(Ms. Pinkowski)
Prerequisite: Must have completed either ART308, ART309, or ART310.

22

Return to Table of Contents

Advanced Portfolio
ART550
(T3)

This course is designed for students with significant prior experience in the visual arts who wish to further their own studio practice while
also building their art portfolio. Students will pursue personal lines of creative inquiry, expression, and self-reflection within a closely-knit
studio cohort. Exposure to a wide range of mediums and modes of working will offer opportunities for students to deepen the breadth of
work represented in their studio portfolio. (Ms. Silva)
Prerequisite: A minimum of two 300-level art electives, a 300- and a 500-level art elective, or ART600.

600-Level Elective
ART600 is open to Uppers and Seniors in all art media who have taken at least three art classes and are interested in self-directed projects.

Advanced Studio Art: Self-Directed Studio Practice
ART600A
ART600B
ART600C
(A YEARLONG COMMITMENT)

ART600 is designed for Uppers and Seniors. The course provides students with the opportunity to broaden their art experience at an
advanced level and also study in depth in areas of their choosing. Students in all art media are welcome and will be expected to also consult
with instructors in their areas of specialization as needed. The course provides students with opportunities for creative, self-directed, and
independent work at an advanced level in a class of similarly advanced and self-motivated students.
Term 1—Students will complete two to three projects in response to broad themes or prompts, and will participate in two, day-long
fieldtrips to regional art museums or art events. Interested students will be guided through the process of assembling portfolios for college,
art school, and/or precollege summer program applications.
Term 2—Students audit a 300-level or 500-level studio elective to focus on a specific medium, while also meeting biweekly with the
ART600 class for readings, discussions, Addison Gallery events, and one or two field trips to art museums. Students will also develop
proposals for their Term 3 projects.
Term 3—Students will complete an independent project that will be part of the ART600 exhibition in the Gelb Gallery.
All three terms of ART600 include periodic group and individual critiques, a weekly evening lab, and one or two field trips to regional art
galleries. (Ms. Pinkowski)
Prerequisite: Open to Uppers and Seniors who have completed three art courses, or with permission of the department chair and the
instructor.

Courses Related to the Study of Art in Other Departments
The World Viewed
ART511CS (may be taken as an Art, English ENG511CS or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG511CS)
(T3)

As the late historian Daniel J. Boorstin noted, with the addition of sound in the late 1920s, film became what Richard Wagner and other
artists had long sought: the Gesamtkunstwerk, the total work of art. Utilizing aspects of architecture, literature, music, painting, photography, and theater, film became the most popular form of art in the world and the dominant form of the 20th century. This course introduces
students to the study of film, helps them develop the skills necessary to read and analyze film, and provides them with a survey of some of
the major movements and genres in film history. While we consider the cultural and historical context of the evolving art of film in various
countries, our primary concern is the close, formal analysis of the individual films we screen. (Mr. Fox)
Note: This course meets three days each week for two consecutive periods. Students who complete the course earn two credits and should
expect to devote fourteen to eighteen, rather than the usual seven to nine, hours to the course each week, including homework and class time.

Elective Courses Recently Taught but Not Offered in 2024–2025
Architecture I
ART301

Design for Living: Innovate and Fabricate
ART311

Art and Activism
ART314

23

Return to Table of Contents

ENGL I SH
Phillips Academy’s English courses are designed to develop, challenge, and enrich every student’s capability to read, respond to, and create
literary texts in classroom communities and on their own. Although each course in the required sequences might have a particular focus,
students should expect to practice and deepen their critical reading, writing, and thinking capacities in all English classes. As they engage
with texts that span genres, periods, styles, forms, and media, students discover and revel in the beauty, joy, and inspiration in the study of
literature.
The core diploma requirements in English require all Juniors to take ENG100, all Lowers to take ENG200, and all returning Uppers to take
ENG300. New Uppers fulfill their diploma requirement by successful completion of ENG301 and three terms of English electives. One-year
American students and some one-year international students (upon placement by the chair of the department) begin with ENG495 for one
term, followed by electives in Term 2 and Term 3. The remainder of the one-year international students begin with ENG498 and ENG499,
followed by an elective in Term 3.
The following chart lists the English curricular sequence for all students:

Phillips Academy English Courses
(*indicates graduation requirement)
4-Year Student

3-Year Student

2-Year Student

Junior Year

ENG100*

Lower Year

ENG200*

ENG200*

Upper Year

ENG300*

ENG300*

ENG301*

Senior Year

Electives

Electives

Electives*

1-Year Student

One-Year Senior				
3 terms*:
or PG Year				
ENG495 + Electives
				 or
				
ENG498/499 + Elective
				 or
				
Electives

Required Courses
The Reader
ENG100A
ENG100B
ENG100C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

The Reader introduces students to the approaches and practices of literary study: reading closely, actively, and imaginatively; thinking
critically about texts in discussions and in their own work; and pursuing the craft of writing through deliberate revision processes. Students
study not only what a text means, but also how it produces meaning. They seek to make connections as they read—perhaps at first only connections between themselves and the text, but eventually connections within the text and among texts as well. They read and engage with a
wide array of texts in different styles, genres, and media created by authors in many different periods, geographies, and contexts. Through
frequent assignments, both formal and informal, ENG100 students come to value writing as a means of making sense of what they read and
think.
ENG100A, Term 1—Students begin ENG100 by building a community of learning in their class while practicing foundational skills of the
discipline: annotating texts; working on sentence and paragraph coherence; recognizing power dynamics; and examining literary terms
such as text, author, theme, narrative, setting, and character. Students receive plentiful and specific feedback on their work throughout
the term and are graded on a Pass/Fail scale this term as an opportunity to learn and adjust to the standards and expectations of Phillips
Academy’s English curriculum.
ENG100B, Term 2—Students continue their community-building in the second term of ENG100 by practicing the seminar discussion more
deliberately. They fortify the skills they learned in the fall and deepen the complexity of their thinking: asking critical questions of texts; testing drafting strategies and pursuing multi-paragraph coherence; naming power dynamics; and examining literary terms such as genre, voice,
structure, diction, and image. Students are graded on a 0–6 scale.
ENG100C, Term 3—Students take more ownership over their classroom community in the third term of ENG100 by leading small-group
and seminar discussions. They continue to strengthen and expand their capabilities as readers, thinkers, and writers: connecting ideas
within and across texts; engaging with multi-stage drafting processes and striving for coherence across a longer piece; describing power
dynamics; and examining literary terms such as context, audience, form, allusion, metaphor, and simile. Students are graded on a 0–6 scale.

24

Return to Table of Contents

The Writer
ENG200A
ENG200B
ENG200C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

The Writer builds upon the literary skills introduced in ENG100 but shifts students’ primary role from reader of texts to creator of texts.
Across the year, students learn to discover and amplify their unique voice by writing across a range of rhetorical modes and genres, from the
personal essay to poetry, fiction, and literary analysis. The course consistently emphasizes process over product: students learn that effective
writing is not the result of a singular bolt of inspiration, but rather the culmination of an iterative, collaborative editorial process between
writer, instructor, and peers. Along the way, reading assignments offer developing writers a wide range of mentor texts meant to both illustrate craft tools students are learning to use and expand their sense of what is possible in literature.
ENG200A, Term 1—Students focus on the art of the personal essay, studying and writing in a variety of rhetorical modes, such as narration,
description, comparison, definition, example, process, and/or persuasion. As they learn to organize, develop, and write cogent essays across
several of these modes, students come to recognize that there is no single “right” way to write an essay. Consideration of an essay’s audience
is central to course discussions, as is analysis of how craft tools might better support each essay’s unique purpose. In the fall, students also
work deliberately on foundational writing mechanics, including clarity, grammar, and punctuation.
ENG200B, Term 2—In the winter, our focus shifts to reading and writing about poetry. The course introduces literary terms and reading strategies specific to poetry and asks students to consider how a poem creates meaning in ways that are different from prose. Writing
assignments build on the work of Term 1 by exposing students to a wide range of prompts, from the critical to the creative, and introducing
students to the analytical essay, with an emphasis on argumentation, development, and integration of textual evidence.
ENG200C, Term 3—The focus shifts again to reading and writing about fiction, with literary terms specific to novels and/or short stories
introduced. Students continue to write in the rhetorical modes introduced in Terms 1 and 2, with a focus on organizing longer and more
complex essays about fiction. Term 3 also encourages students to take more ownership over course discussions and their own writing process, scaffolding the increased independence of scholarship expected in English 300. The year culminates in a writing project that allows
students to further develop and/or combine rhetorical modes and genres studied throughout the year.

The Critical Thinker
ENG300A
ENG300B
ENG300C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

The Critical Thinker is the culmination of the skills developed in ENG100 and ENG200, as students deepen and integrate skills in reading,
writing, and discussion in preparation for senior English electives and for college courses beyond. Central to this process is developing a
student’s criticality, which Gholdy Muhammad defines as “the capacity to read, write, and think in the context of understanding power,
privilege, and oppression.” Using a variety of texts from a range of periods, locations, genres, and mediums, the goal of the course is to refine
students’ ability to recognize systems of power and read them critically in and through texts. Along the way, students will be introduced to a
variety of terms drawn from traditions of literary analysis, cultural studies, and postcolonial studies. Writing is a key instrument in developing a disposition of criticality in our thinking and in how we assert our humanity. Students will finish ENG300 with a sense of independent
thought, critical consciousness, and analytical acumen that engages literature as a way into the complicated moral ambiguity of what it
means to be human.
ENG300A, Term 1—Students can expect a greater focus on the text in the fall term, deepening and integrating the close reading and writing
practices of ENG100 and ENG200. In many ways, the fall term of ENG300 serves as an extension of ENG200’s fiction-focused spring term,
challenging students to develop greater reading stamina and attunement to language in works of fiction. Students can expect their ENG300
experience to begin with a common diagnostic assignment.
ENG300B, Term 2—In the winter term, students are challenged to further extend their scope(s) of close reading from the fall to larger
contexts and frames of criticality between texts. This work of intertextuality can be honed through writing, discussion, and forms of student
teaching, but a central goal for the term is to up the stakes of the critical consciousness and analytical acumen that students began to develop
and refine in the fall.
ENG300C, Term 3—Students work to integrate text, context, and critical thought through intellectual synthesis in the spring term. With
increasing independence and rigor, students engage in evermore challenging critical frames. Whether it takes the form of students applying
a critical lens or vocabulary to a close reading of multiple texts; synthesizing multiple texts together around a central theme; or students
using texts as lenses to close read the world around them, this term prepares students to take on the specialization of the senior seminars
and beyond.

The Critical Thinker for New Uppers
ENG301A
ENG301B
ENG301C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

Tailored to the particular needs of new Uppers, ENG301 conforms in spirit and essence to ENG300, but with more intensive attention to
expository writing. (Mr. Fox)

Strangers in a Strange Land
ENG495
(T1)

This course for one-year students explores how strangers adapt to new places and new modes of being. Does one reinvent oneself, conquer
the new, or seamlessly assimilate? Works considered have included: Ken Kesey’s One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest, Joseph Conrad’s Heart of
Darkness, poems by Terrance Hayes and Emily Dickinson, and Tim O’Brien’s The Things They Carried. (Ms. Chase)

25

Return to Table of Contents

American Studies for International Students
ENG498
ENG499
(T1, T2)

Designed for one-year students from abroad, this course provides intensive training in reading, literary fundamentals, and qualitative
writing. The focus of this course is on American culture, values, and traditions as reflected in literature and other media. One or two terms of
this course will provide students with the reading and writing skills required for success in senior electives. (Mr. English)

The Explorer
The English electives are advanced 500-level courses offering students a rich selection of courses that explore areas of craft, genre, author,
culture, period, and other special topics in depth. Electives are developed along the expertise of the instructor in order to draw on, test, and
enhance the skills and capabilities students develop in earlier coursework. Electives are open to students who have successfully completed
ENG300, -301, -495, -498, or -499. With the permission of the department chair, Uppers may enroll in an elective concurrently with Term 2
and/or Term 3 of ENG300 or ENG301, when space permits.

Writing Courses
Creative Nonfiction
ENG501CN
ENG502CN
(T2, T3)

Contemporary nonfiction author Terry Tempest Williams once said, “I write to discover. I write to uncover.” In this course, we will consider
the ways that creative nonfiction bridges the gaps between discovering and uncovering—that is, between looking forward and looking back,
between imagination and fact, and between invention and memory. This workshop-centered writing course is open to all students interested
in improving their craft, recognizing and amplifying their unique writing voice, and pushing creative boundaries.
ENG501CN, Term 2—Students will explore the art of essay writing by working in a number of rhetorical modes. Possibilities include the
personal essay, the analytical essay, the lyric essay, the review, the profile, and the feature. Writing assignments will be frequent and will
constitute the bulk of the coursework. Short readings will include models selected from an anthology of contemporary work. (Ms. McQuade)
ENG502CN, Term 3—In the spring, we will study the art of the memoir, with a focus on pushing the boundaries of what memoirs can look
like. Students will read from a wide range of contemporary authors, write short autobiographical pieces culminating in an extended essay or
mini-collection, and collaborate in a workshop. Writing assignments will be frequent and will constitute the bulk of the coursework. Texts
may include excerpts from Gay, The Book of Delights; Karr, Cherry; Kingston, The Woman Warrior; Machado, In the Dream House; Nguyen,
Stealing Buddha’s Dinner; Shapland, My Autobiography of Carson McCullers; or other contemporary memoirs. (Ms. McQuade)

Writing for Change
ENG501WT
(T1, T2, T3)

This is a service-learning course in which students discover and/or develop the writers within themselves and then are trained as Andover
Bread Loaf Writing Leads. (Andover Bread Loaf is a Phillips Academy outreach program.) As such, they acquire the capacity to assist
teachers in organizing writing programs and to organize programs of their own. Through in-class workshops, students experiment in many
different genres of writing in a supportive, creative learning community. These workshops also provide students with methods they can use
in working with other K–12 youth.
Readings include poetry and prose texts as well as books about educational theory and practice, such as Multiplication Is for White People
by Lisa Delpit and Pedagogy of the Oppressed by Paulo Freire. The service-learning component of the class consists of working in nearby
Lawrence, Mass., public school classrooms during the period ENG501WT meets. This course is a collaboration among PA’s English department and Community Service program, Lawrence Public Schools, and Lawrence community organizations. Students are invited to join the
Andover Bread Loaf Teacher Network and participate in the conferences, workshops, and events the network offers throughout the year.
(Mr. Bernieri)

Creative Writing: Fiction
ENG505CF
(T1, T2, T3)

This course is for students committed to reading and writing short fiction. Students will be asked to write about short fiction in addition to
composing their own short fiction. Although students are not expected to submit portfolios or samples of their work to qualify for this class,
they must be serious about writing fiction. Previous experience helps, but it is not necessary. (K. Iver)

Creative Writing: Poetry
ENG505CP
(T1, T2, T3)

This course is for students committed to reading and writing poetry. Students will be asked to write about poetry in addition to composing
their own poetry. Although students are not expected to submit portfolios or samples of their work to qualify for this class, they must be serious about writing poetry. Previous experience helps, but it is not necessary. (K. Iver)

26

Return to Table of Contents

Genre Courses
Theories of Children’s Literature
ENG510CL
(T2)

This course considers the role of the imagination in communicating and effecting cultural change. Students will be asked to apply a
variety of critical theory for interpretation and discussion of the literature. Themes explored by this course will include alternative realities, the nature of dreams, the function of the subconscious, and the use of allegory. Probable selections include The Adventures of Alice in
Wonderland and Through the Looking Glass, by Lewis Carroll; Haroun and the Sea of Stories, by Salman Rushdie; The Wind in the Willows,
by Kenneth Grahame; The Jungle Book, by Rudyard Kipling; The Wizard of Oz, by L. Frank Baum; The Pied Piper of Hamelin, by Robert
Browning; The Secret Garden, by Frances Hodgson Burnett; A Child’s Garden of Verses, by Robert Louis Stevenson; The Lion, the Witch
and the Wardrobe and The Last Battle, by C.S. Lewis; and Grimm’s Fairy Tales, Mother Goose, writings by Carlos Castaneda, and essays by
Bettelheim and Zipes. Possible films include The Red Balloon and The Point. (Mr. Tortorella)

Gothic Literature: Living in The Tomb
ENG510GL
(T1)

This course traces trends in Gothic forms, from their origins in the damp and dark castles of Europe to the aridity of the contemporary
American landscape. Students will identify gothic conventions and themes such as the haunted house, family dynamics, apparitions, entrapment, secrecy, and the sublime. They also will read novels, short stories, and poetry spanning roughly 200 years in order to explore questions
about the supernatural, the psychology of horror and terror, the significance of fantasy and fear, the desire for moral closure, and the roles of
gender, race, class, and sexuality. Probable selections include The Castle of Otranto, by Horace Walpole; Faustus, by Christopher Marlowe;
Rebecca, by Daphne du Maurier; Dracula, by Bram Stoker; The Turn of the Screw, by Henry James; stories by Poe, Faulkner, Gaskell, Irving,
Hawthorne, Gilman, Jackson, Cheever, DeLillo, Carver, and Oates; and poetry by Christina Rossetti, Thomas Gray, William Cowper, Louise
Glück, and Sylvia Plath. Possible films include Affliction, The Royal Tenenbaums, A Simple Plan, Psycho, and The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari.
(Mr. Tortorella)

The World Viewed
ENG511CS (may be taken as an English, Art ART511CS, or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG511CS)
(T3)

As the late historian Daniel J. Boorstin noted, with the addition of sound in the late 1920s, film became what Richard Wagner and other
artists had long sought: the Gesamtkunstwerk, the total work of art. Utilizing aspects of architecture, literature, music, painting, photography, and theater, film became the most popular form of art in the world and the dominant form of the 20th century. This course introduces
students to the study of film, helps them develop the skills necessary to read and analyze film, and provides them with a survey of some of
the major movements and genres in film history. While we consider the cultural and historical context of the evolving art of film in various
countries, our primary concern is the close, formal analysis of the individual films we screen. (Mr. Fox)
Note: This course meets three days each week for two consecutive periods. Students who complete the course earn two credits and should
expect to devote fourteen to eighteen, rather than the usual seven to nine, hours to the course each week, including homework and class time.

English Romantic Poetry
ENG511RO
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

In the preface to the second edition of Lyrical Ballads, William Wordsworth claims, “…all good Poetry is the spontaneous overflow of
powerful feelings” produced by authors who “had also thought long and deeply.” For Wordsworth and other poets retrospectively labeled
“Romantic,” the tension between spontaneity and deliberation led to an exploration and interrogation of what constitutes “good Poetry”
in late 18th- and early 19th-century England. In this course, we will examine how the Romantics—especially Wordsworth, Samuel Taylor
Coleridge, Percy Bysshe Shelley, and John Keats—defined and contextualized their art. In doing so, we will consider how and why these writers are grouped together as Romantic poets. Other authors may include William Blake, Robert Burns, Lord Byron, Thomas Chatterton, John
Clare, Mary Robinson, Walter Scott, Robert Southey, and Dorothy Wordsworth. (Mr. Rielly)

Contemporary Drama
ENG512DR (may be taken as a Theatre THD512DR, English, or Interdisciplinary course;
official course number is ENG512DR)
(T1, T3)

One credit assigned each term in English, Theatre, or Interdisciplinary. This course will be devoted to major dramatists from the late
20th- and early 21st-century. Each term, students will read plays through the lenses of race, class, faith, gender, sexual orientation, and other
socially constructed markers. We will attempt to locate the playwrights within and counter to social movements and approach their plays
through historical, cultural, and political contexts. Students will analyze how the best playwrights pose and dramatize important questions
of the time through both writing and staging. (Mr. Grimm)
ENG512DR, Term 1—American Drama. Playwrights studied may include August Wilson, Susan-Lori Parks, David Henry Hwang, Anna
Deavere Smith, Nilos Cruz, Quiarra Alegria Hudes, Tony Kushner, Paula Vogel, Jose Rivera, and Lynn Nottage.
ENG513DR, Term 3—World Drama. Playwrights studied may include Yazmina Reza, Lara Foote, Sara Kane, Maria Irene Fornes, Athol
Fugard, Danai Guerra, and Wajdi Mouawad. (Mr. Grimm)

27

Return to Table of Contents

Black Oratorical Power
ENG513OR (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG513OR)
(T2, T3)

For centuries, countries and institutions have relied on the orator as means of disseminating information, challenging authority, and building community. The United States progressed during the 19th- and 20th-centuries because of Black orators exercising their power and brilliance as means of galvanizing, inspiring, and radicalizing populations to recognize and reject injustice. In this course, students will critique,
read, discuss, and listen to speeches delivered by powerful Black orators throughout U.S. history. These speakers considered the issues of
racism, sexism, and patriarchy as they fought to systemically deliver justice for all people. Authors studied may include Frederick Douglass,
W.E.B. DuBois, Booker T. Washington, Kathleen Cleaver, Angela Davis, Ralph Ellison, and others. (Mr. English)

Blood Roots: Horror Literature and Its History
ENG514HL
(T1)

Author Carmen Maria Machado writes that, “Horror is an intimate, eerie, terrifying thing, and when it’s done well it can unmake you.” From
historical hauntings to modern-day slashers, horror literature as a genre has existed for centuries. Beginning with Walpole’s 1765 medieval
terror The Castle of Otranto, we will study the field’s evolution from gothic horror to contemporary scary stories, exploring the distinctions
between gothic, psychological, and supernatural horrors, among others. Machado goes on to say that horror “tells us a lot about who we are,
what we are, and what we, individually and culturally, are afraid of,” a claim which will guide us as we dive into ghastly and macabre tales
that captivate a culture and hold a mirror up to our truest selves. (Dr. Erdmann)

The Graphic Novel
ENG515GR
(T3)

The graphic novel is an extended comic book with similar subject matter to—and the sophistication of—traditional novels. By its very
nature, the graphic novel challenges our assumptions of what a narrative and novel can be. For those tied to words, the comic offers a challenging visual text that forces us to read in new and surprising ways; much of this course will be about reframing our visual and narrative
habits and expectations. While the graphic novel is increasingly mainstream, it often has offered voices from the margins about the margins. Its subject has been everything from the coming-of-age novel to historical memoir to cross-cultural conflict to the darker side of the
superhero. We will read a variety of texts with the rigor accorded to more traditional texts while also stretching ourselves to understand the
aesthetic visual choices the artist makes. By the end of the term, we will even attempt our own small comics. Texts may include Alan Moore’s
Watchmen, Chris Ware’s Jimmy: The Smartest Kid on Earth, Marjane Satrapi’s The Complete Persepolis, Art Spiegelman’s The Complete
Maus, Frank Miller’s Batman: The Dark Knight Returns, and others. (Ms. Curci)

Cozy Violence: The Development of the Mystery Genre
ENG515MW
(T2)

We will begin with Edgar Allen Poe’s “The Murders in the Rue Morgue,” which is widely considered the first detective story. We will follow
the development of the mystery genre from Poe to writers such as Doyle’s Sherlock Holmes, to Agatha Christie and different approaches to
film adaptations of her work, to current bestseller Louise Penny, and finally to this year’s hot-off-the-press America’s Best Mystery Writing.
We will wrestle with what it is about murder that attracts us as humans. We will look at the way the genre gives us a unique opportunity as a
reader to feel actively engaged in the plot as we try to solve the murder alongside the detective. We will learn about popular subgenres such
as the hard-boiled detective and the cozy, starring an amateur detective. We will consider less conventional forms from authors such as Paul
Aster, Hye-Young Pun, and Dauphne Du Maurier and discuss whether they belong to the genre. Students will be given a chance to demonstrate their understanding of the conventions and structure of the genre with their own creative writing piece. (Ms. Robie)

Mid-20th-Century American Poetry
ENG516CP
(T3)

This course will introduce students to poets and movements that have shaped the direction and contours of American poetry since
World War II. Students first study the Beat Movement and then explore the so-called “schools” of poetry—Black Mountain, New York,
Confessional, et al. The course finishes with an exposure to poetry that is happening right now, which includes bicultural and multicultural
poets. Most class time will be spent deriving themes through discussions of poets, poems, poetic movements, criticism, and theory. Poets
include Ginsberg, Corso, Kerouac, Dylan, Waldman, Bukowski, Creeley, Olson, Levertov, Ashbury, O’Hara, Lowell, Plath, Berryman, Bishop,
Rich, Dove, Hass, Kinnell, Hogan, Nye, Springsteen, and Colvin. (Mr. Tortorella)

Last Acts: Remember Me?
ENG517LA
(T1)

“I got shot,” Tupac Shakur declares at the opening of his posthumous film Resurrection, and the viewer asks, “How did he know that was
going to happen?” This course begins with some basic questions: How will I be remembered? Can I influence that memory? This is a course
that looks at literature and other cultural texts (film, photography, music) produced as a response to those questions, works that the instructor calls “automortography”: a genre that centers on acts of self-representation in the face of death and the mode of reading that such a genre
produces. Automortography, then, is not only how someone consciously or unconsciously anticipates and scripts one’s death, but also how
the audience reads works through the lens of that writer’s death, thus touching on the larger question of how we memorialize others (i.e., in
museums and memorials). In the course, we will explore a range of texts, from Keats to Tupac, to understand these figures, their predicaments and contexts, and why we need and how we use this mode of reading. In taking several diverse cases together, we might ask, “Are they
keeping it real, or is this genre a ploy or performance?” Potentially drawing on examples ranging across disciplines, literary figures to consider may include Sylvia Plath, Reinaldo Arenas, Raymond Carver, Charles Bukowski, Jane Kenyon, May Sarton, William Gaddis, Malcolm
X, and Mark Twain. (Dr. Kane)

28

Return to Table of Contents

Strange Worlds
ENG518SF (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG518SF)
(T1, T3)

One credit assigned in English or Interdisciplinary. The speculative fiction genre collects fantastical elements, imagined histories, and
impossible futures. To write and read a story in this genre is to speculate, to theorize about changing just a few things about the world and
see what happens. In this course, we will focus primarily on writers of color who are best at re-imagining a world that re-centers marginalized narratives to redefine what is possible in terms of gender, race, ethnicity, history, climate, and, above all, power structures. Along with
studying this genre, we will create our own narratives that theorize a world in which our current limitations vanish, and we let our characters
find their own forms of liberation. You will learn about craft, lead discussions, write weekly, and produce your own short fiction piece. (Ms.
Leschorn)

Considering Collections: Contemporary American Poetry
ENG519CC
(T2)

All too often, the work of a poet is read in isolation from their larger collection, perhaps found in an anthology or, more recently, reaching
audiences across new forms of social media. Yet collections of poetry place together poems to be read in sequence and through the experience allow for distinct questions of progression, creation, and harmony. This course interrogates collections of poetry as a space for considering authorial vision and intent, as well as investigating choices of form, organization, and content. Reading poems in conversation, as layers,
and as distinct pieces building to a complete whole, students will be asked to critically read and write while also placing scholarly texts and
reviews into conversation. Collections for this course may include a selection the following authors and beyond: Donald Hall, Danez Smith,
Marie Howe, Sandra Cisneros, Terrance Hayes, Ocean Vuong, Richard Siken, Louise Glück, Ada Limón, Ross Gay, Sharon Olds, and Anne
Sexton. (Dr. Schwalm)

The Contemporary Memoir
ENG519CM
(T1)

This course provides a study of memoir as a literary form, focusing on highly regarded examples from the 1950s to current times. Through
considering book-length narratives based on the author’s memories and lived experiences, we will explore questions of fact and truth, as
well as the role of memory. Considering the relationship between personal and social themes, we’ll explore the various ways these texts may
accomplish the seemingly contradictory work of reflecting collective experiences by grappling with the author’s personal life. Authors for this
course may include a selection of the following and beyond: Edwidge Danticat, Michelle Zauner, Leslie Jamison, Jesmyn Ward, Nick Flynn,
Cathy Park Hong, Paul Kalanithi, and Jennifer Finney Boylan. (Dr. Schwalm)

Humor
ENG519HU
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

Robert Frost called humor “the most engaging cowardice” and Percy Bysshe Shelley characterized laughter as a “heartless fiend,” but maybe
they weren’t in on the joke. In this course, we’ll read literary humor writing—including comedy, satire, irony, and wit—in a variety of forms
and genres in an effort to face a paradoxical (and not entirely unfunny) question: should we take humor seriously? Students should expect to
contend with critical theory, read across genres and media, and attempt to write humor of their own. (Mr. Rielly)

Hybrid Forms: Genre Nonconforming Art
ENG519NG
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

When walking through a library or bookstore, genres present themselves so neatly for our quick access and consumption: fiction, nonfiction, poetry, biography, and beyond. But what happens when an author’s work defies the neat constraints of those long-loved and often-used
labels? In this course we will embark on an expedition through contemporary hybrid texts, erasing those firm lines and challenging ourselves
to consider how space might be made for ideas and identities in nontraditional forms. Together, we shall interrogate the published works of
genre nonconforming artists and their impact, including but not limited to authors such as Tanya Tagaq, Maggie Nelson, Claudia Rankine,
Alison Bechdel, Amy Krouse Rosenthal, Carmen Maria Machado, Ocean Vuong, Franny Choi, and Layli Long Soldier. (Dr. Schwalm)

Special Topics Courses
Under the Fur: Representing the Nonhuman
ENG521BB
(T3)

According to thinker Gilles Deleuze, anyone who likes cats or dogs is a fool. But we live in a time when more than one cable television channel is entirely dedicated to animal programming, when whole weeks are given to sharks, and when people carry their dogs as an accessory. It
seems we are not concerned about becoming fools for species not our own.
This course explores both how animals and animal lives are represented in narrative and how the presence of animals allows us to understand in new ways how narrative and language function. For this reason, we will dip into several genres, disciplines, and media: memoirs,
novels, short stories, poems, philosophical essays, critical theory, internet videos, lectures, and films. We will be asked by these works to
question what it means to represent animals but also what it means to represent at all. How can representation be ethical? How can it
respond to and provoke wider political, theoretical, and philosophical debate? How should we and can we care for the nonhuman world?
What are the dangers, boundaries, and rewards of cross-species sympathy? (Dr. Har)

29

Return to Table of Contents

Law and Literature
ENG521LL (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG521LL)
ENG522LL (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG521LL)
(T1, T2)

One credit assigned each term in English or Interdisciplinary.
ENG521LL, Term 1—Exploring Narrative. This course explores the role of narration and storytelling in law, politics, and literature. It begins
with a study of what narrative is, drawing from readings in literature, philosophy, and psychology. Equipped with a working definition, students will then investigate the narrative form in action across the disciplines of law, politics, and literature. What role does storytelling play
in our law and politics? How do the stories of literature impact our understanding of law and politics?
ENG522LL, Term 2—Exploring Metaphor. This course explores the power and role of metaphor in law and literature. Drawing from
interdisciplinary sources, students will study competing theories on the nature of metaphor and its particular importance in the disciplines
of law and literature. Along the way, students will grapple with two works of literature where the nature of metaphor is on display: Vladimir
Nabokov’s enigmatic novel Pale Fire and the poems of Wallace Stevens in The Palm at the End of the Mind. Some questions we will struggle
with include what is the relationship between metaphor, truth, and literal meaning; how do metaphors generate their meanings; and how, if
at all, might metaphors expand or contract our understanding and experience of the law, the world, and ourselves? Student work will consist
of the analytical essay, discussion board writings, and some introduction to the practice of legal writing and advocacy.
In both terms, readings will draw from a wide range of disciplines and genres, including legal opinions; cultural, political, and philosophical
essays; poems; a novel; and/or a play. (Mr. Calleja)
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors. Open to Uppers who have completed at least one term of ENG300 and who have the permission of the department.

The Novel After Modernism
ENG521NM
(T2)

In the middle of the 20th century, writers began to move past both the period and the styles that we still call “modern.” What does it mean
for a novel to be past modern? Postmodern? Past postmodern? Can a contemporary novel still be a modern novel? In this course, we will
study some of the recent progress of the novel genre and will read novels by Joan Didion, Haruki Murakami (in translation), Vladimir
Nabokov, and Zadie Smith. (Mr. Domina)

Outdoor Writing as Literature
ENG523OW
(T3)

We are drawn to outdoor writing because it’s full of adventure. It is written from a perspective that historically places man in conflict with
nature. In this course, we will look at the earliest writing to come out of Western expeditions, such as the narratives of pioneering climbers
Maurice Herzog, Edmund Hillary, and Tenzig Norgay. We will move on to contemporary adventure writing by authors such as Jon Kraukeur
and films by Jimmy Chin and Elizabeth Chai Vasarhelyi and think about how these works have helped shape the modern Outdoor Sports
industry. We will consider how and why stories about the outdoors can be told from different perspectives as we reassess the man versus
nature trope and expand the diversity of our reading list. We will end by looking at alternative ways of writing about the outdoors and think
about what the future of outdoor writing might look like. This course will focus on analytical writing about outdoor literature. (Ms. Robie)

Rememories: Trauma and Survival in 20th-Century Literature
ENG524TS
(T1)

In her novel Beloved, Toni Morrison coins the term “rememory” to describe a type of memory that won’t stay buried—ghosts of experiences that resurface across years, decades, even centuries, memories of trauma that continue to haunt literature to this day. This course
will examine how narratives of trauma and survival have been represented (and re-presented) in 20th- and 21st-century literature. In our
investigation of literature about war, terrorism, diaspora, and other cultural traumas, we will encounter authors writing from a variety
of historical moments and perspectives. We will look closely at how trauma literature both delineates and breaks down divisions within
individual, societal, and generational trauma experience. And we will engage with course texts by writing in a number of modes, both critical
and creative. Thematic focuses will include the problematics of truth and testimony; the dismantling of traditional narrative structures and
genres; individual vs. collective memory; societal regeneration; and the ways trauma literature engages with issues of race, class, gender, and
national identity. (Ms. McQuade)

Dictatorship and the Artist
ENG529DA
(T1)

In his novel The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao, Junot Díaz cites Salman Rushdie’s claim that “tyrants and scribblers are natural antagonists,” while the narrator of the novel posits that dictators and writers are just competition for each other: “Like, after all, recognizes like.”
This course explores the overlaps and tensions between dictators and artists. While writers will serve as the focus of the class, we will look
at the way other artists in other media have transgressed, adapted to, subverted, or even collaborated with repressive states. While Central
America and South America serve as starting points for the course, artists from around the world will be included. (Ms. Curci)

30

Return to Table of Contents

The Sublime “Other”: “Colors and Words Unknown to Man”
ENG529SO
(T3)

Since the 18th century, the Sublime has been characterized by both the sense of insignificance one feels contemplating the inhuman scale of
natural wonders such as Alpine glaciers or the ocean abyss, and the elevating effect of such contemplation on the imagination. The Sublime,
a word meaning “up to the limit or threshold,” transcends human understanding, defies language. Its aesthetic pleasures are mingled with
ecstasy and horror, with both exhilaration and the fear of annihilation, and mark the Sublime as wholly, inhumanly “other.” In this course
we explore four versions of the literary Sublime: the Romantic and Gothic Sublimes of William Wordsworth’s early philosophical poems and
Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein; H.P. Lovecraft’s “cosmicism” and the articulation of a materialist, scientific Sublime; and the post-Lovecraftian “ontological horror” of Thomas Ligotti’s short fiction. Among the topics that we will consider are the effect of the Sublime on human
consciousness, the role of race in the creation of Shelley and Lovecraft’s Sublime “other,” whether the Sublime can still exist if we no longer
believe in transcendence, and how as a concept, the Sublime might help us in the face of climate catastrophe to think, as philosopher Eugene
Thacker writes about the horror genre, of a world that is increasingly “unthinkable.” (Mr. Bird)

What Is Critique?
ENG530WC (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG530WC)
(T1)

One credit assigned in English or Interdisciplinary. This interdisciplinary course is a survey of questions and ideas about art, literature,
and society, their natures, their functions, their meanings, and their values. What about a work makes it look like it looks or read like it
reads? What gives a work meaning, and how does it do so? What makes a work good, and how do we justify it as such? What are the consequences of judging some works good and others not, of inclusion and exclusion? Who gets to judge—historically, white men—and how do
those judgments establish and reflect the norms and values of societies as a whole? How might we understand and assess “critique” itself as
a form of empowerment against injustice, as in Michel Foucault’s estimation, an “instrument for those who fight, resist, and who no longer
want what is?”
To address these questions and others, we will read the works of many challenging theorists, and we will apply their thinking to various art,
film, and fiction. (Mr. Fox)

Harriet Beecher Stowe and Cultures of Print in 19th-Century Andover
ENG531CP
ENG532CP
ENG533CP
NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025

In this project-based course, students will examine some of the stories that highlight Andover as an important place in the history of the
book, and the ways in which print cultures played an essential role in the story of anti-slavery movements during the the 19th century.
Focusing on campus resident Harriet Beecher Stowe, we will examine the life of her best-selling novel Uncle Tom’s Cabin and the contexts
in which it emerged as an international phenomenon in 1851-52. Each term students will explore the school archives and produce publicfacing work in the form of exhibits, websites, catalogs, podcasts, videos or presentations. (Ms. Tousignant)
ENG531CP, Term 1—The story of Uncle Tom’s Cabin and anti-slavery movements in Andover. In fall term, we’ll read Stowe’s best-selling
novel and explore the struggle over abolition in our school history and the complicated legacy of Stowe in our lives today.
ENG532CP, Term 2—Black activism and print surrounding Harriet Beecher Stowe in the 1850s. In winter term, we’ll look at some of the
significant print works by Black abolitionists that frame the publication of Uncle Tom’s Cabin, including a subversive pamphlet by David
Walker, a diasporic novel by Martin Delany, the newspapers of Frederick Douglass, and the various publications emanating from the Colored
Conventions.
ENG533CP, Term 3—Who was Elizabeth Stuart Phelps? Elizabeth Stuart Phelps grew up on our campus in the middle of the 19th century,
during the years Harriet Beecher Stowe lived here. She attended Abbot Academy and went on to become one of the most famous and popular writers of the 19th-century, in the generation after Stowe. She wrote novels, short stories, a non-fiction account of mill-worker deaths in
Lawrence, an animal-rights novella, biographies of herself and her father, and numerous feminist texts arguing for women's financial and
sartorial freedom. Wow! In spring term, we'll look at her life and works, the world of print culture in which she lived and published, and
what her legacy means to us today.

Change Agents: Examining Advocacy, Audience, and Impact in Literature and the Arts
ENG540CA
(T3)

This course will focus on the intersection of literature and activism. After defining our key terms in relation to questions of representation,
propaganda, branding, and witnessing, we will delve into case studies involving civil rights and social justice, and environmental activism.
We will read fiction, poetry, and drama—thinking about questions of audience and impact. In addition, music, performance, and visual arts
may provide further contexts to understanding the relationship between literature and activism. Writers may include James Baldwin, Don L.
Lee, Alice Walker, Richard Powers, Annie Dillard, etc. Students will choose a cause and investigate a range of artistic acts of activism—and
perhaps produce some of their own. Projects may include the potential for collaborations here on campus and beyond. (Dr. Kane)

31

Return to Table of Contents

Public Displays of Affection: Studies of Romance and Desire in Culture
ENG545PD (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG545PD)
ENG546PD (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG546PD)
ENG547PD (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG547PD)
NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025

One credit assigned each term in English or Interdisciplinary.
Rooted in queer of color critique and ethnic studies, this interdisciplinary course interrogates how American social norms and ideas of “the
good life” both shape and are shaped by popular culture. (Dr. Raymundo)
ENG545PD, Term 1—Norms and Narrative Forms. We begin by examining the “marriage plot” as it emerged in 17th- and 18th-century
English literature, interrogating the historical contexts through which marriage and the reproductive family—entwined as those notions are
with norms of whiteness, bodies, and property—have come to be framed as both social ideals and narrative horizons in the West. We will
then move on to examining how contemporary popular narrative forms, such as the rom-com, the sit-com, and the domestic drama, extend
(or challenge) the entanglement between narrative and norm. Potential texts include Much Ado About Nothing, Othello, Pride and Prejudice,
Jane Eyre, Friends, New Girl, Bridgerton, and The White Lotus.
ENG546PD, Term 2—Romancing the Nation. In the winter term, we will examine narratives of colonial desire and interracial romance.
How, and why, have international power dynamics been imagined as relations between individuals? In what ways have cultural discourses of
love, kinship, and desire been mobilized by the modern nation-state? How do both the fears of miscegenation and the fantasies of multiculturalism shape American culture, both past and present? Potential texts include The English Patient, The Vanishing Half, The Sympathizer,
Caucasia, White Teeth, and Such a Fun Age.
ENG547PD, Term 3—Nuclear Decay. In the spring term, we will focus on the nuclear family and the suburbs as sites of fantasy and decay
in American culture. In the first half to the term, we will examine critiques of the 1950s vision of the good life from those banished to its
margins. In the second, we will explore contemporary novels which set millennial dreams of stability and wealth accumulation against a
background of abandoned suburbs, economic catastrophes, and violent conflict. In an age of infinite war, climate disasters, and AI, how
might notions of private and public, intimacy and kinship, and love and desire evolve? Potential texts include Revolutionary Road, The
Hours, Fences, Gone Girl, Leave the World Behind, Severance, and Broken Harbor.

Literature of Conspiracy
ENG549CT
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

Literature is rife with conspiracy, unreliable narrators, and narrative sleights-of-hand. How do we know what to believe? Whom do we trust
to tell us the truth? What do we do when we discover competing narratives? In this course, we'll examine how literary (and other) narratives
cultivate conspiracy and invite conspiracism. By reading and composing across genre and media—including literature, film, critical theory,
historical documents, and internet writing—we will seek to discern how some narratives become accepted while others recede to the margins. All the while, we will focus on the literary and narrative strategies authors and creators use to persuade audiences to question, doubt,
and disbelieve. (Mr. Rielly)

Single Author Courses
Ernest Hemingway
ENG531EH
(T3)

This single-author course re-examines the life and works of 20th-century author Ernest Hemingway with a critical lens. Students will examine how Hemingway's works were deeply intertwined with the land and communities in which he lived and traveled, focusing most heavily
on his time in Key West, France, Spain, and Cuba. Students will read some of Hemingway’s signature works, which may include In Our
Time, The Sun Also Rises, For Whom the Bell Tolls, and The Old Man and the Sea, as well as his letters and journalistic pieces. (Dr. Driscoll)

Shakespeare
ENG531SH
ENG532SH
ENG533SH
(T1, T2, T3)

Every term the Department of English offers an elective course on the work of William Shakespeare.
ENG531SH, Term 1—Jane Austen’s Henry Crawford says that Shakespeare’s “thoughts and beauties are so spread abroad that one touches
them everywhere.” Perhaps, but to contemplate such thoughts deeply and to appreciate such beauties truly we must read the work of the
great poet-playwright ourselves. In this course, we will study three or four of William Shakespeare’s plays as well as a selection of his sonnets.
There will also be some philosophical readings that we will bring to bear in our analysis of the plays. (Mr. Domina)
ENG532SH, Term 2—“What a Change Is Here!” This term we will examine a selection of Shakespeare’s plays alongside modern adaptations, asking what these reimaginings have to teach us about Shakespeare and what Shakespeare has to teach us about our modern world.
Possible pairings include: Romeo and Juliet with West Side Story; Taming of the Shrew with Kiss Me, Kate; King Lear with Ran; Macbeth
with Throne of Blood; and Henry IV with My Own Private Idaho. (Dr. Gardner)
ENG533SH, Term 3—Shakespeare and the Law. According to Robert Ferguson in his study “The Bard and the Bench,” Shakespeare has
been cited more than 800 times in our court system, including citations from all 37 of Shakespeare’s plays. This course explores Shakespeare
and the law through the close reading of three of his plays: Merchant of Venice, Othello, and Measure for Measure. In doing so, students will
not only engage with the language of the plays, but also the concepts of justice, equity, and law that are found in them. The reading of the
plays will be supplemented with an introduction to some basic legal concepts in contract law as well as an examination of justice and jurisprudence within today’s society. (Mr. Calleja)

32

Return to Table of Contents

John Milton: Poetry and Revolution
ENG532JM
(T2)

Before grasping the forbidden fruit of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, Eve wonders aloud, “what forbids he but to know/Forbids
us good, forbids us to be wise?” and resolves, “Such prohibitions bind not.” Freedom—political and religious, individual and civil—is at the
very heart of John Milton’s thought and work. Over the course of his varied career as poet, polemicist, and statesman, Milton championed
an increasingly expansive definition of freedom, served the short-lived English Republic, defended in print the execution of Charles I
by Parliament, argued for the liberalization of divorce laws, the inviolability of religious conscience, and the freedom of the press from
government licensing and interference, and eventually rejected entirely the Calvinist doctrine of predestination in favor of individual free
will. In this course, we will read selections of Milton’s short poetry and political prose, and then concentrate on Paradise Lost, as we explore
the growth and evolution of John Milton’s revolutionary poetics. (Mr. Bird)

Who Do You Think You Are?: An Alice Munro Retrospective
ENG534AM
(T3)

In 2013, Alice Munro became only the 13th woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in more than 100 years. Now called the “best
fiction writer working in North America,” Munro is considered a master of the contemporary short story. Under Munro’s care, the short
story has been elevated from “practice for novel writing” to a literary form of significant weight and merit. Munro is iconic for fiction that
plays with time, for stories of quiet betrayal, private hurt, and commonplace catastrophe. Her work focuses in on psychological realism, with
precise attention to detail and the illumination of painful everyday truths. In this course, we will examine Munro’s work across the decades,
from 1968’s “Dance of the Happy Shades” to the semiautobiographical pieces that open 2012’s “Dear Life”. Over the course of the term, in
addition to reading upwards of 20 of Munro’s stories, we will examine Munro’s swift acceptance by Canadian critics as well as her more
recent ascent to recognition among the best writers of the modern era. (Dr. Erdmann)

Jane Austen
ENG537JA
(T1)

Jane Austen is beloved by audiences worldwide for her sweeping romances; her work has been adapted many times, in many forms. Her
books are full of intriguing plot, humor, and romance. At the same time, her language is complex and the world she writes about is distant
to contemporary readers, requiring us to hone our comprehensive reading skills in order to glean enjoyment from her works. We will dig
beneath her surface-level love stories in order to explore and appreciate Austen’s impressive comedic writing and social commentary. We will
think about the role gender and class play in the lives of each of her main characters. In addition, we will think critically about the perspectives that are absent in her work. For example, we will read Karen Tei Yamashita’s short story adaptations Sansei and Sensibility as we begin
to explore how a wider audience might access Austen’s writing. (Ms. Robie)

Christopher Marlowe: Dissident Poetics
ENG539CM
(T1)

“His life he condemned,” Thomas Nashe wrote about his friend Christopher Marlowe, “in comparison to liberty of speech.” Playwright and
poet, scholar, spy, and troublemaker, Christopher Marlowe was born the same year and emerged from the same artisan class as William
Shakespeare. By the time of his violent death a mere 30 years later, however, Marlowe had revolutionized the English theatre and influenced
an entire generation of poets while Shakespeare was still establishing his reputation in London’s theatrical and literary scene. In this course
we explore the ways in which Marlowe’s plays and poems embody the ambitions and contradictions of Renaissance Humanism as we follow
the trajectory of Marlowe’s meteoric career and his enduring influence as the literary and sexual dissident par excellence. (Mr. Bird)

Culture Studies
The Sky Is Falling: Magical Realism in Latin American Literature and Beyond
ENG519MR
(T2)

What if you entered a library with infinite titles, endless corridors, and duplicate copies? What if a speck in the sky turned out to be a ceiling,
one that got lower and lower with each passing day? What if your new next-door neighbor seemed remarkably—even eerily—like a future
version of yourself? In this course, we will explore the broad umbrella of magical realism, a literary genre in which primarily realistic stories
contain some element of magic, as well as varying alternative fictions. Each of our texts will take the recognizable world and add unsolved
mysteries, the supernatural, or unexplained phenomena to complicate our understanding of reality, as well as our characters’ experiences
and emotional states. We will explore how and why authors choose to manipulate reality and examine the effects on our understanding of
a character’s motive and identity. Using a broad scope of writers and traditions, we will address Sigmund Freud’s “uncanny,” as well as Dan
Chaon’s “spooky” and Margaret Atwood’s “speculative fiction.” In keeping with magical realism’s roots, we will begin the term with midcentury Latin American writers such as Jorge Luis Borges and Gabriel Garcia Marquez, and then expand our scope to include Kelly Link,
Shirley Jackson, and Jean Rhys, among many others. (Dr. Erdmann)

¡El Cuco! Ghosts, Spirits, and the Supernatural in Latin America
ENG521LA
ENG522LA
(T1, T2)

This course will focus on how Latin American writers in the 20th-century weave paranormal presences into their stories—a literary tool that
has become reflective of trauma or historical strife. Selected works may include Jorge Luis Borges, Gabriel García Márquez, Isabel Allende,
Ana Castillo, Andrea Saenz, and Junot Díaz. (Ms. Tapia)
33
Return to Table of Contents

Time, Space, and Labyrinths in Latin American Literature
ENG523LA
(T3)

This course will focus on Latin American writers’ structural breakdown of the binaries of space and time, often through their use of labyrinths or cyclical plotlines. Selected works may include Julio Cortázar, Alejo Carpentier, Loida Maritza Pérez, Alicita Rodriguez, Jorge Luis
Borges, and Gabriel García Márquez. (Ms. Tapia)

Rebels, Gods, and Villains in Central American Literature
ENG525CA (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG525CA)
(T2)

One credit assigned in English or Interdisciplinary. The rich history of Central America, an isthmus extending from Guatemala to
Panama, is one of resilience and resistance. Ancient traditions and civilizations, like the Mayans, continue to persist. It is the home of
Cimarrones, or Maroons, rebel enslaved African people who freed themselves and established joint colonies with Indigenous populations.
It is the home of the Garifuna, whose history is one of sea exploration and survival. This legacy of never bending at the sight of impossible
odds continues to this day with a long history of writer- activists like Julia Esquivel Velásquez, Pedro Rivera, Carlos Francisco Chang Marín,
Rigoberta Menchú, and Rubén Darío. The literature we will explore will focus on stories and poems about communal power, rebel heroes,
and the diverse cultural history that empowers an entire region. This class will expose you to comparative literature analysis and project
options ranging from podcast creation to poetry translation. Books for this course might include: Popol Vuh, retold by Victor Montejo;
Family Album by Claribel Alegría; I, Rigoberta Menchú: An Indian Woman in Guatemala by Rigoberta Menchú; Stories and Poems/Cuentos
y Poesías: A Dual-Language Book by Rubén Darío; Catrachos by Roy G. Guzmán; Come Together, Fall Apart by Cristina Henríquez; Black
Caribs—Garifuna Saint Vincent’ Exiled People and the Origin of the Garifuna, ed. by Tomás Alberto Ávila. (Ms. Leschorn)

Youth from Every Quarter
ENG530YQ (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG530YQ)
(T2)

One credit assigned in English or Interdisciplinary. Decades before the public education reforms of Horace Mann, Phillips Academy was
founded as a school that “shall be ever equally open to Youth, of requisite qualifications, from every quarter.” This term, we will interrogate
the three words often omitted from this statement of egalitarian ideal: “of requisite qualifications.” By developing historical and contemporary understandings of Phillips Academy itself, we will explore issues of effort, merit, and privilege. When the Academy was founded,
what constituted qualification? Who determined it, for what purposes, and with what consequences? How have answers to these questions
evolved during the last 238 years, and why? How might the Academy become an “anti-racist” institution or, more broadly, one that actively
dismantles structures of power? Is that even possible? (Mr. Fox)
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors. Open to Uppers who have completed at least one term of ENG300 and who have the permission of the department.

Lynn Nottage
ENG531LN or THD531LN (may be taken as an English, Theatre, or Interdisciplinary course;
official course number is ENG531LN)
(T3)

One credit assigned in Theatre, English, or Interdisciplinary. Lynn Nottage is currently the first and only two-time Pulitzer Prize–winning woman playwright. Her notable works include Sweat and Intimate Apparel, and many of them explore the world of working-class
Black Americans. This course will explore her works and their impact in shaping current dramatic literature and performance. (Mr. Grimm)

Change Agents: Examining Advocacy, Audience, and Impact in Literature and the Arts
ENG540CA
(T3)

This course will focus on the intersection of literature and activism. After defining our key terms in relation to questions of representation,
propaganda, branding, and witnessing, we will delve into case studies involving civil rights and social justice, and environmental activism.
We will read fiction, poetry, and drama—thinking about questions of audience and impact. In addition, music, performance, and visual arts
may provide further contexts to understanding the relationship between literature and activism. Writers may include James Baldwin, Don L.
Lee, Alice Walker, Richard Powers, Annie Dillard, etc. Students will choose a cause and investigate a range of artistic acts of activism—and
perhaps produce some of their own. Projects may include the potential for collaborations here on campus and beyond. (Dr. Kane)

The History and Literature of the Haitian Revolution
ENG540HR or HSS588 (may be taken as an English, History, HSS540HR, or Interdisciplinary course;
official course number is ENG540HR)
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

One credit assigned in English, History, or Interdisciplinary. Few events have been as transformative and far reaching in effect—yet so
untaught and unlearned across the humanities—as the Haitian Revolution, which occurred from 1791 to 1804. This interdisciplinary course
will investigate the revolution and its legacy and attempt to address, at least in part, the monumental significance of the only successful
large-scale slave rebellion in the Atlantic World. By 1804, the newly independent Haitians, freed by their own hands, had won for themselves
a unique inheritance: theirs was a society born of the Age of Revolutions and animated by the Enlightenment-inspired language of liberty,
but equally theirs was a society deeply rooted in African and Afro-Caribbean slave culture. In its independence, Haiti became the center of a
transnational Black diaspora as it defended its existence at a time when the United States and European colonial powers viewed racial slavery as the pillar of their burgeoning capital economies. This elective aims to explore these complicated ideas through a variety of texts, digital
archives, fiction and nonfiction, literature, and history. (Ms. Curci and Dr. Jones)
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors. Open to Uppers who have completed at least one term of ENG300 and of HSS300 and who have the
permission of the departments.

34

Return to Table of Contents

An Introductory Survey of African American Literature
ENG541AA (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG541AA)
ENG542AA (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG542AA)
ENG543AA (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG543AA)
(T1, T2, T3)

One credit assigned each term in English or Interdisciplinary. This seminar course offers an overview of African American literature
through reading and writing assignments, discussions, student-led seminars, and visiting lecturers on art, music, and history. Trips to museums and jazz or blues club performances enhance the students’ appreciation of cultural contexts. The fall term focuses on the early writings,
on the literature of slavery and freedom, and on the literature of Reconstruction. In the winter, students read the literature of the Harlem
Renaissance and African American expressions of realism, naturalism, and modernism. In the spring, the Black Arts Movement and African
American literatures, including film and drama, since the 1970s are the foci of the course. (Ms. Albert)

Asian/American Literature and Film
ENG541AS (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG541AS)
ENG543AS (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG543AS)
(T1, T2, NOT OFFERED IN T3)

One credit assigned each term in English or Interdisciplinary. This seminar explores the literary, historical, and broader sociocultural
development of the complex and ever-expanding body of work that collectively (and not always neatly) contributes to what may be called
“Asian/American” literature and film. We will engage with a wide range of written and visual texts, including poetry, fiction, memoir, cinema,
and television, as well as with scholarly and other artistic forms of production, in order to fashion an analytical framework, informed
perspective, and interpretive approach through which to reread and rethink the culture, politics, and history of the United States itself.
A related goal is to understand the role of literature and other cultural forms in our nation’s struggles over identity, power, and resources.
Focusing on the development and representation of Asian/America, we will unpack the social formation of race and the complexity of racial
dynamics in the United States historically and today.
ENG541AS, Term 1—The syllabus includes works by canonical and popular authors, filmmakers, and content creators. To develop and flex
our critical tools and skills of reading, viewing, analyzing, and interpreting these written and visual texts, we will learn about and practice
applying fundamental concepts, themes, and critical methodologies of the field of Asian/American literary and cultural studies. Our goal in
this seminar is to gain wide exposure to the exciting diversity of Asian/American literature, film, and cultural production.
ENG543AS, Term 3—Placing Asian America: Ethnic Enclaves in Literature and Film. This special topics seminar is organized around a
broad theme such as Asian/American activism, Asian in the U.S. Literary Imagination, or a specific genre, historical period, or geographic or
cultural region (e.g., Viet Nam or Chinatowns). (M. Martin)

“Crossing the Line”: U.S.-Mexico Border Literature and Contemporary Politics
ENG541BL
(T1)

What does it mean to live on or near a border, and more importantly, what does it mean to read and write literature about border
experiences? In this course, students will explore the U.S.-Mexico border and literature produced “on the line,” what Gloria Anzaldúa
describes as “La Frontera.” Students will read works that identify as “border literature” and will be introduced to border studies, discussing
themes such as immigration, hybridity, border militarization, and in general, issues concerning U.S-Mexico border politics. Possible authors
to be studied: Yuri Herrera, Cormac McCarthy, Nicholas Mainieri, Cristina Henríquez, Luís Albero Urrea, Emma Pérez, Lucretia Guerrero,
Sandra Cisneros, Reyna Grande, and Ana Castillo. (Dr. Driscoll)
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors. Open to Uppers who have completed at least one term of ENG300 and who have the permission of the department.

Asian/American Dramatic Literature
ENG541DR (may be taken as an English, Theatre THD541DR, or Interdisciplinary course;
official course number is ENG541DR)
(T2)

One credit assigned in English, Theatre, or Interdisciplinary. This course explores the ever-expanding body of work that collectively
(and not always neatly) contributes to what may be called “Asian/American” dramatic literature. Students will read and engage with plays by
Asian American dramatists from the 20th- and 21st-century through the lenses of class, faith, gender, sexual orientation, and other socially
constructed markers and dimensions of human experience and identity, with a particular focus on the social formation of race and the complexity of racial dynamics in the United States historically and today. Additional material will be examined so that we can better understand
the role of dramatic literature in our nation’s struggles over identity, power, resources, and representation. (Mr. Grimm & M. Martin)

Indigenous Literature
ENG541IL (may be taken as an English, or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG541IL)
(T2)

One credit assigned in English, Theatre, or Interdisciplinary. What does it mean to be a Native American writer in the 21st century?
In this Senior elective course, students will explore life on and off the Native American reservation in works produced by writers from a
wide variety of Indigenous communities in the United States. The course will involve navigating issues/topics a propos to Native American
studies, such as colonialism and genocide, cultural survival, and political and environmental activism. Possible writers to be studied: Luci
Tapahonso, Evelina Zuni Lucero, Sherman Alexie, Paula Gunn Allen, Leslie Marmon Silko, Ramson Lomatewama, Simon Ortiz, nila northSun, Joy Harjo, Gerald Vizenor, Louise Erdrich, Diane Glancy, Winona LaDuke, Anton Treur, Wendy Rose, and Linda Hogan. (Dr. Driscoll)

35

Return to Table of Contents

“I See Your True Colors”: Queer Literature
ENG541QL (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG541QL)
(T3)

One credit assigned in English or Interdisciplinary. This course examines poems, plays, and stories that raise key questions about
sexuality, gender, identity, and desire. Alongside our core literary texts, we will also consider art, music, and film as well as classic texts in
the history and theory of sexuality. Topics may include: gay liberation; AIDS activism; the closet, passing, and coming out; the relationship
between feminism and lesbian practice; trans identities and narratives; bisexual erasure; queer communities, spaces, and performance;
non-normative love and affinity; law, medicine, psychoanalysis, and religion; homophobia, transphobia, and heterosexism; mental health;
debates around same-sex marriage and assimilation; and the intersections of sexuality with race, class, age, nationality, and ability. (Dr.
Gardner)
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors. Open to Uppers who have completed at least one term of ENG300 and who have the permission of the
department.

A Room of Their Own: Women’s Studies and Literature
ENG541WW (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG541WW)
ENG542WW (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG542WW)
ENG543WW (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG543WW)
(T1, T2, T3)

One credit assigned each term in English or Interdisciplinary.
ENG541WW, Term 1—Virginia Woolf. The fall term of this women’s and gender studies course will focus on the author of its namesake,
Virginia Woolf, to build an understanding of the complicated emergence of “women’s literature” as a genre. Iconic, revolutionary, and not
without her own shortcomings, Woolf fundamentally reimagined the novel’s potential to reflect internal experiences of womanhood, queerness, and non-normativity, while her nonfiction articulated economic and cultural obstacles facing woman-identified writers. Reading the
arc of her aesthetic development, paired with her essays and diaries, students will explore Woolf ’s individual evolution as an artist as well
as her lasting significance. Together we will develop the muscles to speak and write with intersectional nuance about literature’s capacity to
interrogate gender’s impact and mutability.
ENG542WW, Term 2—We will continue to deepen and expand our engagement with feminist discourse by reading texts that explore complicated dynamics around romance, sexuality, and power. We will read a range of woman-identified writers as they navigate intimacy and
desire and a struggle to exist within or beyond marriage and the domestic. Together, we will pose questions about the potential for feminine
freedom in romantic entanglement across history, culture, and identity, and contend with how often these narratives must also explore the
potential (or lack thereof ) for economic freedom. Authors may include Sally Rooney, Jane Austen, Toni Morrison, Katie Kitamura, Jean
Rhys, Zadie Smith, Alice Munro, Charlotte Bronte, Jo Hamya, or Raven Leilani.
ENG543WW, Term 3—In the 2016 comedy Bad Moms, Kristen Bell’s character, a stay-at-home mom named Kiki, galvanizes her fellow
moms, saying, “We don’t quit! Moms don’t quit! Quitting is for dads.” Though intended to garner a laugh, the moment points to a deeply
held belief that seems to cut across vast swaths of time and culture: that motherhood should be the single defining experience of a woman’s
life, and that mothers who “quit,” in one form or another, are monstrous or out of step with a gender-defining instinct to nurture. This term,
we’ll explore the intersectional specter of The Mom in literature, film, and television, paying particular attention to the recent rise of memoirs and novels that explore female ambivalence to the project of child rearing. Questions will include: How does motherhood shape cultural
norms around gender? What does it mean to be with or without children in a dominant American culture that centers their production?
And, in a post-Roe world, how do we fathom the shifting landscape of what it means to mother? Authors may include bell hooks, Maggie
Nelson, Rachel Cusk, Edward Albee, Audre Lord, Rivka Galchen, Toni Morrison, William Shakespeare, Jenny Offill, Marilynne Robinson,
Euripides, Alexis Schaitkin, Claire Vaye Watkins, or Sheila Heiti. (Ms. Foushee)
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors. Open to Uppers who have completed at least one term of ENG300 and who have the permission of the
department.

Lockdown
ENG544LD (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG544LD)
(T2)

One credit assigned in English or Interdisciplinary. Prisons are a growth industry today in the United States. This course, through a
blending of literature, film, and social sciences, will examine incarceration. By reading novels, memoirs, and poetry and viewing a few films,
we can gain a greater appreciation of the psychological effects of these institutions and the power of art as a means of coping with them
(touching then on witnessing and testimonials). We will ask questions about ethics and justice, about self-expression, and about social control. The course will include some experiential learning in the form of a trip to the Essex County Correctional Facility and to a nearby youth
court. Some possible titles may include: Orange Is the New Black, Gould’s Book of Fish, The Trial, Brothers and Keepers, A Place to Stand, One
Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, and Zeitoun. (Dr. Kane)
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors. Open to Uppers who have completed at least one term of ENG300 and who have the permission of the
department.

Period Studies Courses
Medieval Literature—Chaucer Projects
ENG546ML
ENG547ML
(T2)

One credit assigned each term in English or Interdisciplinary.

36

Return to Table of Contents

ENG546ML, Term 1—Only in Our Dreams. Have you ever fallen asleep over your books? If so, you are essentially a medieval poet already
because they snoozed on their reading materials all the time and even composed volumes of poetry about the experience. These stories, however, do more than report what a writer might have seen while asleep. They probe the edges of selfhood, the idiosyncrasies of desire, the borders
of memory, the scope of the imagination, the fertility of grief, the insistence of ideas, and the force of literature. And that’s just the short list.
In the first term of Medieval Literature, we will primarily be studying two poets, Geoffrey Chaucer and the anonymous Pearl-poet; both lived
through a time of plague, a time when the shape and the possibilities of the world were redrawn, an event that divided history into “then”
and “now.” As we muddle through our own extraordinary time, perhaps we are exceptionally prepared to understand the lure and the solace
of the world of dreams. We will encounter these topics—and more!—in two of Chaucer’s Middle English dreamscapes, in the Pearl-poet’s
trippy, glittery alliterative journey to heavenly climes, in secondary sources from classical, medieval, and modern eras, as well as in podcasts
and films.
ENG547ML, Term 2—Chaucer-Based Learning. The second term of Medieval Literature offers an introduction to Geoffrey Chaucer: his era,
his city, and his vibrant, edgy, unsettling, prescient, comedic, and relevant Canterbury Tales. Chaucer, as you may know, has long been imagined
the “father of English poetry,” which is somewhat strange for a man who never once in his vast writings referred to himself as a “poet.” Although
he remains a canonical figure in the history of English letters, this class aims to explore what Chaucer can mean right now, today, for us.
The first couple weeks of this term will invite us to consider the author himself, the contexts of his writings, and the basics of reading Middle
English. The bulk of the term, however, will be shaped by you, by each individual student’s interests and investments. Starting with questions and curiosities, we will work collaboratively to craft a flexible reading list, research plan, and project proposal for each student. One of
us might read a curated collection of tales; one of us might explore digitized manuscripts; one of us might dive into a single tale, its sources,
its analogues, and its critics; one of us might compare Agbabi’s adaptations with Chaucer’s originals. Each week we will also come together
over a shared class reading, in individual conferences, and in working groups to exchange discoveries, ask questions, and take pleasure in the
experience of learning. (Dr. Har)

Outsiders and Underdogs in American Literature
ENG548AR
(T1)

This course examines the greatest American literature of the 19th century, with an eye to its massive cast of rascals, loners, misfits, fugitives,
dreamers, renegades, and wanderers. We might think of the defiance of Hester Prynne and the roving spirit of Huck Finn; the tenacity of
Harriet Jacobs and the resourcefulness of Ruth Hall; the swagger of Whitman and the watchful solitude of Dickinson; the inscrutability of
Bartleby and the perversity of Poe’s oddballs; the determination of Douglass and the calculated disobedience of Thoreau; and the curiosity of
Ishmael and the obsession of Captain Ahab. What is particularly “American” about these outsiders and underdogs? Why did these characters
figure so large in the 19th-century literary imagination, and what draws us to them still? What captivates us about Whitman’s proclamation, “From this hour I ordain myself loos’d of limits and imaginary lines”? Through analytical writing, creative projects, and discussion with
their peers, students will have the opportunity not only to delight in extraordinary uses of language, but also to delve deeply into the big
questions: what it means to belong, the allure of escape and exploration, the relationship between the individual and society, the realities of
oppression and inequality, the ethical duties of citizenship, the uses and gratifications of art, the journey to self-discovery, and the contours
of a good life. (Dr. Gardner)

The William Sloane Coffin Jr. ’42 Colloquium Series
This colloquium series brings instructors from across the Academy to engage students in a particular topic. Typically, approximately 15
faculty members representing a half dozen departments participate in the colloquia. Previous topics have included Bob Dylan; Justice, Law,
Tyranny; London: Harbinger of Modernity; Charles Darwin; Relativity, Incompleteness, and Subjectivity; Youth from Every Quarter; Things
Fall Apart; The Storm; Martin Luther King Jr.; and Conservatism.

The Will of the People
ENG590CO (may be taken as an English, History and Social Science, or Interdisciplinary course)
(T1)

One credit assigned each term in English or Interdisciplinary. Article 21 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides that
“The will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government; this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine elections which
shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret vote or by equivalent free voting procedures.” With its origins in Jean
Jaques Rousseau and Social Contract theory, the “will of the people” has taken on a variety of meanings and use in law, society, and culture;
it is at once a metric for progress and prosperity in a state and a necessary component for what it means for an individual and society to be
free. And at its core, this fundamental idea of government by the people—with free elections as its necessary mechanism—serves as the basis
for the theory of our constitution and the ideals of democracy.
It would not be hyperbole to say that 2024 marks the height of governance by the will of people in all of human history. Indeed, the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) has called 2024 the biggest election year in history with nearly 60 nations (and half of
the world’s population) holding elections. At the same time, the OHCHR notes that these elections are occurring amidst significant declines
in democratic institutions and deep skepticism that democracy and elections work. What are the factors that contribute to this paradox of
democracy that our world now faces?
President Franklin D. Roosevelt famously said, “Democracy cannot succeed unless those who express their choice are prepared to choose
wisely. The real safeguard of democracy, therefore, is education.” In this colloquium, students will examine what it means to be a democratic citizen in today’s society, exploring the complex role of elections in our governing institutions and the multitude of challenges that
democracy faces. This interdisciplinary course will tackle the topic of democracy and elections through a variety of disciplines–history, law,
literature, mathematics, philosophy, and political theory, to name just a few.
Following the model of previous colloquia, we will meet twice each week, and with different members of the faculty leading the class from
week to week. There also may be potential for speakers and guest instructors from outside the academy. (Mr. Calleja, coordinating faculty
from various departments)

37

Return to Table of Contents

Elective Courses Recently Taught but Not Offered in 2024–2025
Media Studies
ENG511MS
ENG512MS
ENG513MS

Orphic Lyricism in American Poetry
and Experimental Film
ENG511OL

This Is America
ENG511TW

Journalism
ENG514JO

The Graphic Novel
ENG515GR

COVID-19, BLM, and the Precarity of Life
ENG520CO

American Identities in African Literature
ENG521AI
ENG522AI
ENG523AI

Being, Thinking, Doing
ENG521BT

Arthurian Clatter
ENG526AC

Foundational Gender Theory
ENG530GT

Justice, Law, and Tyranny
ENG530JL

August Wilson’s View of the 20th Century: His
Pittsburgh, Our America
ENG531AW or THD531

38

August Wilson’s View of the Second Half of the
20th Century
ENG532AW or THD532

Charles Dickens
ENG537CD

Don Quixote
ENG539DQ

Atomic America: Service Learning
ENG540AA

African Literature
ENG540AF

Post-Colonial India: History and Literature
through Salman Rushdie’s Midnight’s Children
ENG540IN

The Boom Generation
ENG541BG

Steal This Course!
ENG544ZZ

Modernisms
ENG546MO

John Donne and 17th-Century English Poetry
ENG547JD

“I Am Not I”: 16th-Century English Poetry
ENG547PO

The Internet in Print
ENG549DD

Class on Great Migration
ENG549GM

Return to Table of Contents

HISTORY A ND SOCI AL SCI ENCE
The study of history and the social sciences provides certain kinds of knowledge, skills, and understanding fundamental to a liberal arts
education. An understanding of the American past continues to be a prerequisite for a participating citizen in a constitutional republic.
Equally vital is the examination of other cultures around the globe to broaden a student’s understanding of an interdependent world. The
Department of History and Social Science therefore integrates the study of international cultures throughout its program.

Diploma Requirements
Entering four-year students must successfully complete seven terms of departmental study. HSS100A, HSS100B, HSS201, and HSS202 are
four terms in total. The additional three terms of U.S. history (HSS300A, HSS300B, and HSS300C) complete the department’s requirement. Students entering as 10th-graders must successfully complete four terms of departmental study: one term of HSS201 taken in 10th
grade and three terms of U.S. history. Students entering as 11th-graders must successfully complete three terms of U.S. history as described
above or, if given credit by the department chair for a U.S. history course taken previously, three terms of other courses in the department.
Students entering as 12th-graders and postgraduates are strongly encouraged to take courses in history and social science but are not
required to do so unless 1) the department deems their previous preparation inadequate, in which case they will be required to complete
a term of departmental study; or 2) they took U.S. history in 9th or 10th grade, for which the department ordinarily does not grant
credit. For one-year international students, the diploma requirement is the completion of three terms of history, starting with HSS320.
The Department of History and Social Science grants no credit for summer study, including work completed at Phillips Academy’s
Summer Session.

Placement
The department is dedicated to placing students in the appropriate level of history study. Such placement is ordinarily done by departmental
review of a student’s previous record. On the basis of their previous academic record in history and social science and other subjects, some
students may be advised to wait to begin the U.S. history sequence. It should be noted that there is no requirement that students begin U.S.
history during their upper year, but the department does strongly recommend it for 11th-graders.

Phillips Academy Galleries, Libraries, Archives, Museums (GLAM)
The Department of History and Social Science encourages the use of the Academy’s extensive on-campus resources.
In addition to working closely with our librarians, students have the opportunity to work with faculty and staff in the Academy’s Archives
and Special Collections, Addison Gallery of American Art, and Robert S. Peabody Institute of Archaeology.
For students who have completed HSS300 and are interested in pursuing work with the raw materials of history (including oral history),
the Academy’s archivist offers a unique tutorial-research opportunity on some aspect of the history of Phillips Academy or Abbot Academy.
Students undertaking archival study for credit should apply for an Independent Project through the Dean of Studies Office.

Notes for Students and Advisors
The Department of History and Social Science places great value on teacher continuity and works with the scheduling office to ensure that,
as often as possible, students in the 100 and 300 sequence retain the same instructor. The HSS201 and HSS202 courses, however, are not a
continuous sequence. They are term-contained courses. Returning Lowers who will take HSS201 and HSS202 should not expect to have the
same instructor in both classes.
In the past, students have applied for independent projects (IPs) when they have desired to do advanced work in history or social science
not covered by our elective program. We now ask that students interested in advanced work in this department enroll in HSS600 in Term 3
instead of applying for an IP.

World History
HSS100A
HSS100B
(TWO-TERM SEQUENCE; HSS100A AND HSS100B CAN BE TAKEN T1 & T2, T2 & T3, OR T1 & T3)

HSS100A, Exploring Global Antiquity, 600 B.C.E.–600 C.E.—For Juniors. Exploring Global Antiquity investigates the creative and
disparate ways in which communities across the globe developed, organized themselves, and responded to crucial social, political, and
economic obstacles. This course asks students to examine particular stories in detail, whether it be the Persian challenge to Greek city states,
the great temple construction of the Maya, the consolidation of the Han Empire in China, or the striking emergence of Christianity in the
Mediterranean basin. Students will practice and improve the skills essential to the study of history and social science: think objectively; read
and evaluate primary sources and secondary sources; annotate efficiently and organize notes; write with clarity and concision; integrate
evidence effectively in written and oral argument; use library research tools; and utilize a variety of textual, visual, statistical, and physical
materials to understand and explain the past.
HSS100B, Sojourns Across a Connected World, 600 C.E.-1400 C.E.—For Juniors. In the second term of world history, students examine the increasing connections between societies caused by mass migrations, imperial conquests, and cross-cultural trade and exchange.
Students will explore the impact of and responses to the exchange of customs, goods, ideas, beliefs, technologies, and germs. Topics include
the Bantu expansion, trade in the Americas, the spread of Islam, and the Mongol conquests. Writing, research, and analytical skills introduced in HSSl00A will continue to be developed through the exploration of these topics.

World History: Thematic Approaches, Exchange, Resistance, and Adaptation, 1400 C.E.–1800 C.E.
HSS201
(T1, T2)

For Lowers. This course will examine how economic, intellectual, and social change developed as a dialogue between peoples of the world
from 1400 to 1800. By examining primary and secondary sources from multiple perspectives, students will work to contextualize local
experiences within global transformations and will be encouraged to understand historical change as a dynamic process. Areas of study will
include economies of silver, the Atlantic slave trade, gunpowder empires, and religious reform and transformation.

39

Return to Table of Contents

World History: Thematic Approaches
HSS202
(T2, T3)

For Lowers. Instructors teach one of several thematic courses. Each is a different topic with different content but designed to develop the
same skills.
As students of history, we aim to examine, understand, contextualize, and explain human societies and the individuals within them.
Intended to provide a “lens” for studying the past, this world history course will delve into one of several themes for the term. This thematic
approach will provide a unique opportunity to study the development of human societies. With an emphasis on building analytical and critical writing skills, students will also continue to work on mastering reading, critical thinking, collaboration, and research.

The United States
HSS300A
HSS300B
HSS300C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

For Uppers and Seniors. To understand the present, one must study the past. In this three-term course, students will examine the history of
the United States from the 15th and 16th centuries to the early 21st century. Within this temporal span, students will engage with a diverse
range of historical voices and experiences in order to unpack the longstanding tensions, debates, and inequities informing this country’s
history, society, and institutions, as well as to understand how different people and groups have challenged those inequities. Through
this course, students will focus on improving those skills essential to the discipline of history: critical thinking and writing, research, and
informed and engaged discussion.
Students completing this course who wish to take the College Board Advanced Placement (AP) exam should check with their teachers, since
extensive review is required.

Topics in United States History for International Students
HSS320A
HSS320B
(T1, T2) TWO-TERM COMMITMENT

A course for entering Seniors for whom English is a second language. The intention of this course is to recognize the particular needs and
strengths of students. The content is focused around key questions and issues in United States history. These include how a “democracy”
emerged in America, the enduring dilemma of race and ethnicity, the rise of the American economy, and America’s role in the world. The
course emphasizes writing and language skills by gradually increasing the complexity of assignments and the amount of reading.

Advanced Courses
Advanced courses, numbered 400 and above, are open to students who have successfully completed at least one term of HSS300 or, in rare
cases, with the permission of the department chair. These courses may be taken for a term only, but students may choose to remain in twoterm or yearlong elective sequences.

Senior Research and Writing Seminar
HSS495
(T1)

For one-year students. This course emphasizes the skills needed to successfully complete Andover’s upper-level history electives. It will share
with other humanities classes an interest in how language and evidence are used—and misused—to make arguments. Our primary focus
will be learning how to research and write persuasive essays and papers, and we will benefit from frequent visits and access to the campus’s
Oliver Wendell Holmes Library. This course is organized around a series of contemporary themes: the duties and obligations of citizens in
the 21st century, global poverty, human rights, and war and peace.

Economics I: Microeconomics and the Developing World
HSS501
(T1, T2)

In HSS501 students study microeconomics, theory of the firm, the organization of markets, and the role of governments in all areas of
the global economy. Special attention is given to development economics, resource markets, questions concerning racial and gender wage
discrimination, and public sector issues such as health care and the economics of the environment. Students also study a range of economic
development models and complete an applied research project using such models in relation to a contemporary developing country. Classes
consist of discussions, simulations, debates, problem sets, and team research. Students completing this course are eligible to enroll in
HSS502 and/or HSS503.
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

40

Return to Table of Contents

Economics II: Macroeconomics and the Global Consumer
HSS502
(T2, T3)

HSS502 introduces students to the basic principles of macro- and microeconomics and their application and relevance to national and international public policy. Students examine the development of the contemporary global economy and use basic theoretical tools to analyze
current issues. Classes consist primarily of discussions, although the course also employs role-playing, films, lectures, and student reports on
their term projects.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of HSS501.

Economics Research Colloquium
HSS503 (runs concurrently with HSS504)
(T3)

This research colloquium investigates public policy issues in the field of economics. Topics include the debates over sustainable growth, tax
reform, supply-side economics, labor organization, national industrial policy, pollution, population growth and welfare policy, and the ethical responsibilities of business. Classes center around discussion of individual students’ works in progress; a term paper and presentation on
an issue of choice are required.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of HSS501.

Environmental Economics
HSS504 (may be taken for History and Social Science, Science, or Interdisciplinary credit;
official course number is SCI460)*
(T3)

One credit assigned in History and Social Science, Science, or Interdisciplinary. This course is a case-based introduction to using
economics to look at some of the major environmental problems in the 21st century. In this topic-driven course, students will learn about
the role of market failure in environmental issues, the challenges of pricing environmental goods, and ways in which economic theory can
be used to help solve these problems. Topics such as overfishing, global warming, water pollution, and others will be covered from the angles
of science and economics. Special consideration of the unique role that social justice plays in many of the topics will be considered as well.
Students will be assessed on problem sets, essays, in-class discussions, and an individual research project. (Mr. Parker and Mr. Robinson)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

Comparative Government
HSS505
(T2)

This course introduces students to the world’s diverse political structures and practices. A comparative study of six nations—Britain, Russia,
China, Nigeria, Mexico, and Iran—serves as a core for the course. By examining the political implications of different types of social and
economic development, students become familiar both with general political concepts and with a broad array of specific issues, and they are
able to use their knowledge as a template for examining how other countries respond to global challenges. Students may choose to write an
in-depth paper in lieu of a final exam. (Mr. Fritz)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

History of Financial Crises and Civic Reactions (1700s–present)
HSS506
(T1)

Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff documented the fact that from 1800 to 2012 almost no year was free of financial crises somewhere
in the world. Financial crises cause significant damage, including unemployment, bankruptcies, social instability, regime changes, and geopolitical tensions. This course will evaluate a selection of case studies between 1720 and the present, placing students in the shoes of one or
more protagonists and at a point where the student must analyze the issues, make a decision, and recommend action. Karl Marx and others
have pointed to the recurrent financial crises in capitalist economies as proof of the terminal illness of the capitalist system. On the other
hand, Joseph Schumpeter and others have stated that periodic slumps and crises are necessary cleansers of inefficiencies. Financial crises
expose the worst (and sometimes the best) in markets, institutions, instruments, and leaders. Selected readings and current events articles
will supplement the chosen case studies. Student assessment will include response papers, debates and role-playing, a research paper, and a
current events portfolio. (Mr. Parker)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

History in Your Pocket—American Stories, Ideals, and Economics as Told through Coins and Currency
HSS507
(T2)

This course will use material culture as a primary vehicle to challenge students to sharpen their observational, analytical, and written and
oral communication skills. Students will examine U.S. coins, tokens, and currency notes produced from 1652 to the present from a variety
of perspectives to spark inquiry into, and conversations regarding, topics including American idealism, political propaganda, economics,
artistic design choice, ethics of collecting, and the inclusivity/exclusivity of people chosen to be depicted on currency. This course will have
a significant hands-on component and will regularly study the school’s numismatic collection in the classroom. Through this, students
will closely examine objects and identify and analyze complex iconography to attempt to “read” the past and access the minds and ideals of

41

Return to Table of Contents

historical peoples and times. As a culminating assessment, students will select and study a suite of objects and publicly present their findings
in the form of a small museum exhibit or a poster session. (Dr. Slater)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

American History of Economics and Inequality
HSS508
(T3)

This course will examine the history of economic inequality in the United States, starting with the Gilded Age and progressing to modern
times. How have economic systems and institutions perpetuated inequality across the centuries? What types of inequality are important and
why? What is the relationship between inequality and equity? Students will improve their research and presentation skills while studying
policy-related and scholarly research about inequality, with particular attention to social identity, labor movements, and family economic
systems through the ages. (Dr.Blakeney)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

Women's, Gender, and Sexuality Studies
HSS509 (may be taken as a History or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is HSS509)
(T3)

One credit assigned in History or Interdisciplinary. Pink is for boys and blue is for girls. At least it used to be. We will explore the ways that
our everyday lives are guided by socially prescribed gender norms. Through the study of the historical production and contemporary interpretation of the categories of “woman” and “man,” “female” and “male,” “heterosexual” and “homosexual,” we will seek to better understand
how gender-based inequalities have evolved and are both supported and simultaneously contested in societies across the world. In addition,
we will seek to gain a better understanding of the ways that gender, sex, and sexuality inform local, national, and global efforts to improve
the lives of individuals and to achieve social justice for entire communities. We also will explore the intersection of sexuality, gender, sex,
race, ethnicity, class, and other forms of identity. Through a variety of sources—written documents, social media, film—this course will introduce students to a wide variety of issues across disciplines, including historical, anthropological, medical, legal, and popular culture. We also
will explore contemporary uses of social media as sites of research, activism, and networking. (Dr. Ramos)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

African History
HSS517
(T1)

In the late 1960s, a British historian declared that Africa did not have its own history, that “There is only the history of Europeans in Africa.
The rest is darkness.” This racist and incendiary statement, along with sub-Saharan Africa’s push for independence in the mid-20th century,
drove scholars in Africa and beyond to examine a range of sources, including oral traditions, oral histories, archaeological evidence, and
archival records, to uncover Africa’s dynamic past. This course provides an introduction to that expansive history. Students will focus on
African agency and ingenuity in the face of upheaval, invasion, and extraction during the 19th and 20th centuries. Major topics addressed
will include African societies’ responses to the “scramble for Africa” and the onset of European colonialism; Africans’ encounters with
foreign missionaries and merchants; the rise of anticolonialism and competing nationalisms; and nation-making and un-making during the
Cold War. In what ways did people in Africa respond to and make sense of new challenges under European colonizers? How did colonialism
reconfigure African societies, cultures, and economies while reifying malleable constructs like gender, ethnic groups, and cultural traditions?
Who led independence movements and what futures did they imagine for a free Africa? The course centers perspectives, scholarship, and
literature by Africans to explore these broad questions. (Dr. Lambert)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

History of Asia
HSS521
(T1)

This course examines the history of modern Asia from the 19th century to the present. Students should expect to be engaged in reading and
discussing a multitude of perspectives drawn largely from primary sources to understand Asian history through Asian voices. At the same
time, the course will draw from sources written by non-Asian scholars to understand how the same moments in history can be narrated
and remembered differently in an effort to bring light to the ongoing debate of history writing and historiography. The course will take a
chronological and thematic approach to the study of Asian history, exploring social and political revolutions, race and gender relations, as
well as intellectual and cultural developments within the chronological framework of imperialism in Asia, the rise of nationalism in Asia,
Asia during the World Wars and the Cold War, and current issues in Asia. (Dr. Smith)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

Vikings
HSS544
(T2)

This course explores the history of Scandinavian peoples from the eighth through the 13th centuries using archaeological and narrative material. The Vikings, or Norse, of Scandinavia had a distinct culture and worldview that, beginning in the eighth century, spread to various parts
of the world. They were a people who were flexible in their thinking, and they were open to exploring new ways of understanding the universe
and their place in it through travel and expansion east, west, and south. This course will cover the exploration and colonization in Greenland
and North America, the establishment of Norman kingdoms in Western Europe, and the movement of the Kievan Rus in Eastern Europe and

42

Return to Table of Contents

the Steppe. Students will examine how interactions with different peoples—such as Indigenous groups in Greenland and Canada, the Muslim
Empire, and the Mongols’ Golden Horde—determined ideas around power, boundaries, ownership, and even time. (Ms. Booth)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

Indigenous Civil Rights in the United States
HSS563
(T3)

The civil rights struggle for native peoples in the United States is ongoing. From the beginnings of settler colonialism, native peoples have
faced unique problems as they try to maintain their cultures and autonomy. They have also been resilient through their activism for social
justice. This class begins at the opening of the 20th century. Initiatives from the white government such as the boarding schools, the Dawes
Act, and treatment of native peoples as specimens in natural history museums set the scene. For the white government, native people needed
to assimilate or perish. After an overview of the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924, the Indian Reorganization Act 1934, and the Termination
policy, we move into the “civil rights era” of the late 1960s. Activism from groups such as the American Indian Movement (AIM) wanted
to restore autonomy for native peoples. How could tribes restore rights promised in treaties signed with the U.S. government? How could
they establish sovereignty on the reservations? How could they combat the degradation of their environments? The Native American Graves
Protection and Repatriation Act of 1990 acknowledged the unique forms of discrimination faced by Indigenous peoples as museums were
mandated to return objects to their rightful tribal owners. Current activism often focuses on land and fishing rights and protesting environmental destruction on tribal lands from pipelines and fracking. Many native communities are particularly vulnerable to climate change
and are vocal in their demands for social justice through the protection of their homelands. Students will work with the Peabody Institute of
Archaeology to understand the unique civil rights issues facing native peoples in the United States. (Ms. Doheny)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

North American Borders
HSS564
(T1)

This course provides a space for engaging discussion and analysis on the conceptualization of borders, specifically the construction of
imaginary and physical North American borders that unite as much as divide the people of the United States, Mexico, and Canada. Students
will study the historiography of the social and political interactions among varied peoples along the native, imperial, and national borders of
the continent throughout the mid-1800s to the present day. The class will explore themes concerning differential power relations; immigration, citizenship, human rights, and sovereignty; nationalism, transnationalism, and internationalism; border openings and closings; and
the ethnic groups that cooperate or engage in conflict along these shifting and evolving boundaries. These complicated ideas will reflect the
leading discourse from not only borderlands specialists but also the polemic rhetoric emerging from (non)state actors across the continent to
understand the diversity of thought on shaping borders. (Dr. Villanueva)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

Youth Power/Youth Protest: Social Protest Movements in US History
HSS571
(T3)

The right of self-determination and the determination of one’s destiny. The end of job, housing, and employment discrimination. The end of
police harassment, arrest, violence, and murder. These demands represent just a fraction of those articulated by social protest movements in
United States history. Ordinary young individuals united to instigate change beyond conventional political networks. They formed organizations, used violent and nonviolent means to express their rage, and fought for their right to exist in the United States free of oppression and
repression. This course will delve into the dynamics of Black Power, Gay Power, Brown Power, Red Power, and Yellow Power movements in
the United States, focusing particularly on the pivotal role youth played in these organizations. For your final project, you will offer solutions
and strategies to a present-day issue using historical context and examples from the past. (Mr. Denby)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

A History of 1968: Year in Crisis
HSS572
(T2)

This course will examine the historical forces and societal turbulence that American society faced in 1968. While historically confined to
one chronological year, the course will evaluate a subset of historical developments whose trajectory and intersection in ’68 caused a bitter
struggle over the collective identity of the American people. The course will consider the Vietnam War through Tet, the assassinations of
MLK and RFK, the presidential leadership of LBJ, the political tumultuousness of the ’68 presidential campaign, the student protest at
Columbia and impact of youth, the experience of Black nationalists and the connectedness to events in Europe.
More generally, the course will examine the historical pathways of American liberalism and conservatism in ’68 as well. Students will seek
to understand the interplay of these historical events in order to consider how the disparate themes of crisis, courage, inspiration, hopelessness, optimism, and resentment meld together in arguably the most significant year in modern American history. Readings include histories,
journal articles, primary sources, and other selected readings. Student assessment includes in-class written work, out-of-class paper(s), a
moderate-length research paper, and participation in class discussion. (Mr. Hession)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

43

Return to Table of Contents

House Divided: Political Polarization, Nixon to Obama
HSS573
(T1)

With ever-deepening divisions along partisan, ideology, and identity lines, this history course examines political polarization from Nixon
to Obama. To explore whether the country has indeed entered a Second Civil War, the course draws from multiple historical developments associated with this era of political polarization. The course first examines how electoral politics and campaign strategies since 1972
and thereafter significantly transformed American conservatism and liberalism, impacting the political fortunes of the Republican and
Democratic parties. The course will evaluate how the politics of race, identity, and economic inequality contributed to Republican and
Democratic Party orthodoxy and what factors, if any, disrupted tribal affiliation in the era.
Additionally, coursework will consider the grassroots nature of political polarization and how historical developments such as the rights revolution, family politics, tax revolts, the war on drugs, and suburban politics influenced the country’s bitter partisan and cultural divide in the
past quarter century. Finally, the course will assess how cable news, talk radio, and the internet both exacerbated partisan divides and stoked
backlash, paranoia, and conspiratorial thinking. Student assessment includes in-class written work, out-of-class paper(s), a moderate-length
research paper, and participation in class discussion. (Mr. Hession)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

Critical Race Theory: The American Dream Deferred
HSS574 (may be taken as a History or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is HSS574)
(T3)

One credit assigned in History or Interdisciplinary. Historically, American society does not recognize race as the language of class. In this
discussion-based seminar, students will examine ways in which race and class intersect. Critical race theory eschews the goal of assimilation
into current social structure and instead looks at the experience of the “outsider” as a lighthouse that illuminates structural problems within
American Society. Students will use Critical Race Theory to analyze historical legal cases—including the nation’s first successful school
desegregation in 1931 where Mexican Americans sued San Diego, CA public schools for access and the famous 1957 court-ordered desegregation of Little Rock, AR High school—in addition to contemporary legal cases of “reverse discrimination” such as Fisher v. The University
of Texas in 2012. Students will ultimately explore the question, “Is the American dream a structural fallacy that has explanation for success
but none for failure?” Assignments will consist of selected readings, reflection pieces, article reviews, and a research paper. (Ms. Paulson)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

A Social History of Latin America
HSS581
(T2)

This class will focus on the lives of people in Latin America as well as Brazil. We will cover the history of Mesoamerica and colonial Latin
America from pre-Columbian times through independence and to the present. Specifically, we will focus on the social relationships between
Indigenous, African, and European peoples as a way to understand the impact that colonialism has had on the development of national
identities. Through a social lens, we will examine the challenges that Latin American peoples have faced in creating stable nations, including
issues of sovereignty, social and economic inequality, natural resources, and of course, relations with the United States. We will look at how
colonial legacies, neocolonial ties, and globalization have affected Latin America and its people. Questions that we will consider are: How
have race, gender, and class influenced national identity development? Historically, what roles have Indigenous, Black, and mixed-race
peoples played in these nations? What challenges has Latin America faced in developing a viable political and economic system? What role
has the United States played in the development of Latin American political and economic systems? What do scholars understand to be the
lasting legacies of hundreds of years of colonialism and U.S. involvement? (Dr. Villanueva)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

The History and Literature of the Haitian Revolution
HSS588 (may be taken as a History, English ENG540HR, or Interdisciplinary course;
official course number is ENG540HR)
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

One credit assigned in History, English, or Interdisciplinary. Few events have been as transformative and far reaching in effect—yet so
untaught and unlearned across the humanities—as the Haitian Revolution, which occurred from 1791 to 1804. This interdisciplinary course
will investigate the revolution and its legacy and attempt to address, at least in part, the monumental significance of the only successful
large-scale slave rebellion in the Atlantic World. By 1804, the newly independent Haitians, freed by their own hands, had won for themselves
a unique inheritance: theirs was a society born of the Age of Revolutions and animated by the Enlightenment-inspired language of liberty,
but equally theirs was a society deeply rooted in African and Afro-Caribbean slave culture. In its independence, Haiti became the center of a
transnational Black diaspora as it defended its existence at a time when the United States and European colonial powers viewed racial slavery as the pillar of their burgeoning capital economies. This elective aims to explore these complicated ideas through a variety of texts, digital
archives, fiction and nonfiction, literature, and history. (Dr. Jones and Ms. Curci)
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors. Open to Uppers who have completed at least one term of ENG300 and of HSS300 and who have permission
of the departments.

44

Return to Table of Contents

The Olympics
HSS592
(T2)

This course will examine the origins and evolution of the modern Olympic games via the following topics: impact on politics and society, equity
and ethics, controversies and scandals, inspirational stories and the role of athletes as national icons, and lessons of sportsmanship. Students
will engage with a variety of sources across disciplines. Independent research and analytical writing skills will be emphasized. (Mr. Fritz)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

Natural Causes: How Climate Change Wrote History
HSS593 or (may be taken as a History, Science SCI476, or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is HSS593)
(T2)

One credit assigned in History, Science, or Interdisciplinary. The impact of human activity on the behavior of the earth’s climate has
become one of the overriding concerns of the modern world, making climate change the central environmental problem of our time.
Anticipating the impact of climate change on modern civilization, however, is not an easy exercise. Past climate change can help us to understand it as a catalyst for change that humans were not aware of, and can then help us to decide the role humans have played in the current
environmental situation. Through a series of case studies, we will investigate how civilizations have been influenced by weather and climate
change. Starting with a historical overview of broad changes in climate, students will investigate specific instances when weather has influenced the course of history. How, for example, did winter weather protect Russia from invasion by first Sweden, then Napoleonic France and
Nazi Germany? We will then expand our scope to examine the larger and longer-term influence of climate shifts on the course of regional
civilizations, such as the Maya in Central America, the Tang Dynasty in China, and the Harappan/Indus Valley civilization. The third group
of case studies will examine the impact of global climate shifts on the interaction between civilizations on a continental scale. Examples
could include the rise and spread of the Mongol civilization from central Asia to Eastern Europe and eastern Asia. We will end the term by
examining the possible consequences of climate change on the future course of modern civilization. (Ms. Doheny)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed any term of HSS300.

History in Four Books: American Civil War
HSS594
(T1)

The "Four Books" elective is designed to examine a historical topic using a primary source, two historical monographs, and a piece of fiction.
In this course, we will read four books that explore the powerful ideas animating the mid-19th century North and South as they waged war
against one another with the fate of slavery and the republic in the balance. Taken together, these books deliver vastly different stories about
the Civil War, immersing us in the politics of the Union and the Confederacy, the world of enslaved people, and the experiences of common
folk as well as leaders. We close with one of the great fictional renderings of Southern life and Civil War memory. (Mr. Jones)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed any term of HSS300.

Fashion in History
HSS595
(T2)

“There is something about fashion that can make people very nervous,” remarks Anna Wintour in the 2009 film The September Issue.
Fashion studies is an interdisciplinary field, but one that retains a study of the past as central. It asks the question, “Does what people wear
matter?” More than any other facet of material culture, an interest in fashion is often dismissed as trivial or seen as an emblem of superficiality. However, clothing represents far more than narcissism or the physiological need to cover oneself for warmth and safety. From headwear
to footwear, fashion can communicate what we do, who we think we are or would like to be, where we are from, and what we care about.
Fashion can be used as a lens to consider change.
Using iconic fashion items from history, this course will explore what they communicate about global cultures, historical moments, social
and political status, economic clout, gender, and identity. (Ms. Frey)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

History Research Seminar
HSS600
(T3)

Building upon research skills developed in the Department of History and Social Science’s 100, 200, and 300 sequences as well as our
500-level elective offerings, HSS600 challenges students to tackle more in-depth and independent (though still instructor-guided) research.
Class periods will variously include lecture and discussion to build students’ critical research skills and will provide work time devoted to
library and internet research, writing, editing, teacher conferences, and peer review. Throughout the term, students will build toward the
production of an academically rigorous research paper as they complete checkpoints, including a topic proposal, thesis statement, annotated
bibliography, outline, and a paper draft. To encourage students to take full ownership of their research and to pursue individual passions in
history and social science, each student will be given the autonomy to select a research topic of their choosing. Class size may be limited, and
this course will take the place of most history Independent Projects. (Ms. Frey)
Prerequisite: Completion of the HSS300 sequence.

45

Return to Table of Contents

Courses Related to the Study of History and Social Science in Other Departments
Histories of Art
ART444 (may be taken as an Art or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ART444)
ART445 (may be taken as an Art or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ART445)
ART446 (may be taken as an Art or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ART446)
(T1, T2, T3)

One credit assigned in History, Science, or Interdisciplinary. Michelangelo’s David. A three-second Snapchat. The Rothko Chapel. Video
of the Confederate flag being carried in the Capitol. O’Keeffe’s Flowers.
Images constantly and incessantly bombard us, yet how do we process, deconstruct, and understand them? How do we place them in larger
cultural, political, and social contexts? How do we wallow in beauty and magnificence? How do we discern a variety of meanings and best
ensure we are not victims of ideology?
In this three-term interdisciplinary course, we students explore images and objects as primary sources unveiling the values and ideas of the
society in which they were produced, and we they pay particular attention to the effects of class, economics, gender, national identity, optics,
politics, race, religion, sexual orientation, technology, and urbanism on art and visual culture. By focusing on both form and context, we
students foster a visual literacy that will serves us them well for a lifetime. Although the course focuses primarily on the traditional “fine”
arts, we students develop the skills and dispositions to navigate varied elements the complexities of contemporary visual culture including
TikToks and amateur videos. (Mr. Fox)
ART444, Term 1—The term begins with art as mimesis—as representation of “reality”—in Greece and concludes with its further development during the Renaissance in Italy and Northern Europe. Along the way, students encounter creators such as Praxiteles, Giotto, and
Leonardo and explore many topics, including: the development of organized labor, the economics of the Medici Bank, the evolution of the
social status of some creators from craftsman to artist, the devastation of the Black Death, the gendering of different media (tapestries versus
sculpture, for example), and the power of monarchy and papacy.
ART445, Term 2—The term stretches from the Reformation through Impressionism, and students examine themes throughout, including:
the evolving tension over the obscuring of boundaries between the wonders of art and the wonders of nature; the gradual shift of sovereignty from pope and king to individual and from patron to artist; the development of photography; the prevalence of rape imagery; the
changes in social regulation, spectacle, and exhibition; the rise of “globalism” in London and Paris. Students study artists such as Caravaggio,
Rembrandt, Bonheur, Courbet, and Monet.
ART446, Term 3—The term covers the end of the 19th century to the present day, and students encounter a range of artists, including:
Paul Cézanne, Pablo Picasso, Käthe Kollwitz, Jackson Pollock, Andy Warhol, Cindy Sherman, El Anatsui, and Banksy. Among other topics,
students explore the fragmentation and disappearance of mimetic art, the global catastrophes of depression and war, the development of
“American Art,” the feminist art movement and the challenges of intersectionality, the solidification of art as commodity—the economics of
the contemporary art market and the politics of museum display—and the postmodern dismantling of the Eurocentric tradition that permeates contemporary visual culture. (Mr. Fox)
Prerequisite: Open to Lowers, Uppers, and Seniors, who may take one, two or three terms.

46

Return to Table of Contents

Elective Courses Not Offered in 2024–2025
Disease and Medicine in the United States:
Pox and Pestilence
HSS480 or SCI480

Silences and Gaps: The Record of Chinese
Students in the Phillips Academy Archives
HSS511

The American Civil War, 1845–1877
HSS565

U.S. Immigration History: Inclusion and Exclusion
in the Making of Law, Policy, and Nation
HSS570

HSS515

Reclaiming the Black Body: A Cultural History on
the Representation of Black Bodies in the African
Diaspora

Storied Environments: African Environmental
History Since 1800

Urban Crisis

HSS516

HSS576

History of the Middle East

Schooling in America

History Through Film

HSS531

Topics in the History of the Middle East
HSS532

Europe: Birth, Revolution, and War
HSS541
HSS542
HSS543

Gender and Power in Tudor England
HSS546

Race and Identity in Indian Country:
Decolonizing Museums and Healing the Wounds

HSS575

HSS577

American Popular Culture
HSS578

Environmental History
HSS579

Shamans, Sacrifice, and Ceremony: The Maya
Spirit World from Antiquity to the Present
HSS583

Sport and Society
HSS591

HSS561

Skulls, Angels, and Hour Glasses: Early New
England Gravestone Iconography and Field
Research
HSS562

47

Return to Table of Contents

INTERD ISCI PLI NA RY STUDI ES
A liberal education seeks, in part, to produce citizens who are synthesizers of information, interrogators of knowledge, and discerners
of meaning—citizens equipped to question and enact justice. While a school fosters such critical thinking in myriad ways, integrative
approaches to learning provide students with skills and dispositions fundamental to this aim: identifying preconceptions and bias, recognizing the validity of another’s point of view, appreciating ambiguity, understanding ethical considerations, sparking creative problem-solving,
and ultimately employing these skills in the pursuit of bettering our world.
At Phillips Academy, interdisciplinary approaches to learning can be structured in varied ways, yet the core component of any interdisciplinary experience has the student—the epistemological site of learning—place two or more disciplines in an active, sustained conversation that
stresses connections.
The Department of Interdisciplinary Studies creates, houses, and supports individual courses devoted to interdisciplinary learning as well
as courses devoted to the study of race-class-gender-sexuality, and it collaborates with other departments to embed such study across the
curriculum. Throughout its work, the department is guided by its stated philosophy outlined in “Interdisciplinary Work at Andover: Purpose
and Scope” (2016).
Each of the following courses may be taken for credit in Interdisciplinary Studies (INT). In addition, most courses may instead be taken for
credit in one or more other academic departments, as indicated.
Courses that significantly embed intersectional studies of varied axes of identity, including race-class-gender-sexuality, are highlighted
with an (*).

Interdisciplinary Courses 2024–2025
COURSE #

INT COURSE #
Term 1

ART444

Histories of Art

INT503HA1

ENG512DR/THD512DR

Contemporary Drama

INT547DR

ENG518SF

Strange Worlds: Building Realities in Speculative Fiction

INT547SW

ENG521LL

Law and Literature

INT504LL1

ENG530WC

What is Critique?

INT512WC

ENG541AA

An Introductory Survey or African American Literature

INT532AA1*

ENG541AS

Asian/American Literature and Film

INT514AS1*

ENG541WW

A Room of Their Own: Women’s Studies and Literature

INT517WW1

ENG590CO

William Sloane Coffin Jr. ’42 Colloquium Series—Democracy and Elections:
The Will of the People

ENG590CO

MTH440

Financial Literacy Seminar

INT543FL

PHR530

Ethics: Medicine

INT538ME

PHR531

Ethics: Environment

INT544EE

SCI420

Environmental Science: Food, Agriculture, and the Future

INT501FA

THD910

Identity

INT542ID*

Term 2

48

ART445

Histories of Art

INT503HA2

CHI622

LGBTQ+ Literature and Media in China

INT516CH*

ENG513OR

Black Oratorial Power

INT548OR

ENG522LL

Law and Literature

INT504LL2

ENG525CA

Rebels, Gods, and Villains in Central American Literature

INT525CA*

ENG430YQ

Youth from Every Quarter

INT533YQ*

ENG541DR/THD541DR

Asian/American Dramatic Literature

INT541DR

ENG541IL

Indigenous Literature

INT541IL

ENG542AA

An Introductory Survey of African American Literature

INT542AA*

ENG542WW

A Room of Their Own: Women’s Studies and Literature

INT517WW2*

ENG544LD

Lockdown

INT518LD*

HSS593/SCI476

Natural Causes: How Climate Change Wrote History

INT507NC

SCI410

Environmental Science: Global Climate Change

INT501GC

SCI470

Human Origins

INT510HO

Return to Table of Contents

Interdisciplinary Courses 2024–2025 continued
COURSE #

INT COURSE #
Term 3

ART446

Histories of Art

INT503HA2

CLA552

Women in Antiquity

INT524WA*

ENG511CS/ART511CS

The World Viewed

INT511CS

ENG512DR/THD512DR

Contemporary Drama

INT547DR

ENG513OR

Black Oratorial Power

INT548OR

ENG518SF

Strange Worlds: Building Realities in Speculative Fiction

INT547SW

ENG531LN/THD531LN

Lynn Nottage

INT511LN

ENG541QL

“I See Your True Colors”: Queer Literature

INT541QL

ENG543AA

An Introductory Survey of African American Literature

INT532AA3*

ENG543WW

A Room of Their Own: Women’s Studies and Literature

INT517WW3

HSS504/SCI460

Environmental Economics

INT545EE

HSS509

Women’s, Gender, and Sexuality Studies

INT521WG

HSS574

Critical Race Theory: The American Dream Deferred

INT520CR*

MTH440

Financial Literacy

INT543FL

PHR522

Feminist Philosophies

INT534FP*

PHR530

Ethics: Medicine

INT538ME

PHR531

Ethics and the Environment

INT544EE

PHR532

Ethics and Technology

INT535ET

PHY445

Astrobiology

INT506AB

SCI430

Water and Humanity

INT502WH

SCI460/HSS504

Environmental Economics

INT545EE

* Courses that significantly embed intersectional studies of varied axes of identity, including race-class-gender-sexuality, are highlighted with an (*).

Environmental Science: Food, Agriculture, and the Future
INT501FA (may be taken as a Science or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is SCI420)
(T1)

This course examines agriculture as a major driver of global environmental change and public health trends. We will explore the demands
placed on food production by population growth and a dietary transition, the chemical origins and ecological impacts of fertilizer, and the
implications of limited resources of water, land, and oil. The course will integrate fundamental environmental principles of nutrient cycling
and energy flow, provide an introduction to environmental economics and policy, and examine how agriculture affects land use, climate
change, and biodiversity. We will explore public health impacts of agriculture including food safety, antibiotic resistance, and the rise of obesity and diabetes. Finally, we will consider the future of agriculture and food. Readings will include original scientific literature, nonfiction
books and essays, text excerpts, and news coverage. Students should be prepared to undertake a term project. (Mr. Robinson)
Prerequisite: Open to Uppers and Seniors who have completed one year of laboratory science.

Environmental Science: Global Climate Change
INT501GC (may be taken as a Science or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is SCI410)
(T2)

This course prepares students to grasp the science behind the politics. The course begins with an overview of climate science, including
atmospheric composition, major biogeochemical cycles, principles of energy conservation and flow, the greenhouse effect, atmospheric and
oceanic circulation, and natural climate variability. We then investigate recent anthropogenic climate change, examining both causes and
consequences. We will primarily consider impacts on ecological systems, but also assess impacts on public health, economics, and global
justice. The second half of the course will address the response to global climate change by investigating mitigation strategies. Students will
analyze current and potential future sources of energy, both nonrenewable and renewable. Readings will include original scientific literature,
nonfiction books and essays, text excerpts, and news coverage. (Mr. Mackinson)
Prerequisite: Open to Uppers and Seniors who have completed one year of laboratory science.

Water and Humanity
INT502WH (may be taken as a Science or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is SCI430)
(T3)

Water and Humanity examines the dynamic and tenuous relationship between water resources and human development. Exploring water
from a multidisciplinary, project-driven perspective, students will think critically about the central role water has played and must continue
to play in the viability and vitality of all civilizations, as well as the many challenges that people face in sustaining, protecting, and gaining
access to usable fresh water. Students will encounter diverse materials, use holistic approaches, and engage in innovative project planning
to consider, understand, and propose solutions to complex water issues. This course will focus on the value of water and on the issues that
water scarcity presents within the contexts of such elements as religious belief and practice, the human-water relationship in fine art and
architecture, national and imperial infrastructure, and industrial development. Students also will think about the role of water in their own

49

Return to Table of Contents

local, regional, and global communities, while researching and proposing their own solutions to complex multidisciplinary water issues. (Mr.
Mackinson)
Prerequisite: Open to Uppers and Seniors who have completed one year of laboratory science.

Histories of Art
INT503HA1 (may be taken as an Art or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ART444)
INT503HA2 (may be taken as an Art or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ART445)
INT503HA2 (may be taken as an Art or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ART446)
(T1, T2, T3)

Michelangelo’s David. A three-second Snapchat. The Rothko Chapel. Video of the Confederate flag being carried in the Capitol. O’Keeffe’s Flowers.
Images constantly and incessantly bombard us, yet how do we process, deconstruct, and understand them? How do we place them in larger
cultural, political, and social contexts? How do we wallow in beauty and magnificence? How do we discern a variety of meanings and best
ensure we are not victims of ideology?
In this three-term interdisciplinary course, we students explore images and objects as primary sources unveiling the values and ideas of the
society in which they were produced, and we they pay particular attention to the effects of class, economics, gender, national identity, optics,
politics, race, religion, sexual orientation, technology, and urbanism on art and visual culture. By focusing on both form and context, we
students foster a visual literacy that will serves us them well for a lifetime. Although the course focuses primarily on the traditional “fine”
arts, we students develop the skills and dispositions to navigate varied elements the complexities of contemporary visual culture including
TikToks and amateur videos. (Mr. Fox)
ART444, Term 1—The term begins with art as mimesis—as representation of “reality”—in Greece and concludes with its further development during the Renaissance in Italy and Northern Europe. Along the way, students encounter creators such as Praxiteles, Giotto, and
Leonardo and explore many topics, including: the development of organized labor, the economics of the Medici Bank, the evolution of the
social status of some creators from craftsman to artist, the devastation of the Black Death, the gendering of different media (tapestries versus
sculpture, for example), and the power of monarchy and papacy.
ART445, Term 2—The term stretches from the Reformation through Impressionism, and students examine themes throughout, including:
the evolving tension over the obscuring of boundaries between the wonders of art and the wonders of nature; the gradual shift of sovereignty from pope and king to individual and from patron to artist; the development of photography; the prevalence of rape imagery; the
changes in social regulation, spectacle, and exhibition; the rise of “globalism” in London and Paris. Students study artists such as Caravaggio,
Rembrandt, Bonheur, Courbet, and Monet.
ART446, Term 3—The term covers the end of the 19th century to the present day, and students encounter a range of artists, including:
Paul Cézanne, Pablo Picasso, Käthe Kollwitz, Jackson Pollock, Andy Warhol, Cindy Sherman, El Anatsui, and Banksy. Among other topics,
students explore the fragmentation and disappearance of mimetic art, the global catastrophes of depression and war, the development of
“American Art,” the feminist art movement and the challenges of intersectionality, the solidification of art as commodity—the economics of
the contemporary art market and the politics of museum display—and the postmodern dismantling of the Eurocentric tradition that permeates contemporary visual culture.
Prerequisite: Open to Lowers, Uppers, and Seniors, who may take one, two, or three terms.

Law and Literature
INT504LL1 (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG521LL)
INT504LL2 (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG522LL)
(T1, T2)

ENG521LL, Term 1—Exploring Narrative. This course explores the role of narration and storytelling in law, politics, and literature. It begins
with a study of what narrative is, drawing from readings in literature, philosophy, and psychology. Equipped with a working definition, students will then investigate the narrative form in action across the disciplines of law, politics, and literature. What role does storytelling play
in our law and politics? How do the stories of literature impact our understanding of law and politics?
ENG522LL, Term 2—Exploring Metaphor. This course explores the power and role of metaphor in law and literature. Drawing from
interdisciplinary sources, students will study competing theories on the nature of metaphor and its particular importance in the disciplines
of law and literature. Along the way, students will grapple with two works of literature where the nature of metaphor is on display: Vladimir
Nabokov’s enigmatic novel Pale Fire and the poems of Wallace Stevens in The Palm at the End of the Mind. Some questions we will struggle
with include what is the relationship between metaphor, truth, and literal meaning; how do metaphors generate their meanings; and how, if
at all, might metaphors expand or contract our understanding and experience of the law, the world, and ourselves? Student work will consist
of the analytical essay, discussion board writings, and some introduction to the practice of legal writing and advocacy.
In both terms, readings will draw from a wide range of disciplines and genres, including legal opinions; cultural, political, and philosophical
essays; poems; a novel; and/or a play. (Mr. Calleja)
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors. Open to Uppers who have completed at least one term of ENG300 and who have the permission of the department.

The History and Literature of the Haitian Revolution
INT505HR (may be taken as an English ENG540HR, History HSS588, or Interdisciplinary course;
official course number is ENG540HR)*
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

Few events have been as transformative and far reaching in effect—yet so untaught and unlearned across the humanities—as the Haitian
Revolution, which occurred from 1791 to 1804. This interdisciplinary course will investigate the revolution and its legacy and attempt to
address, at least in part, the monumental significance of the only successful large-scale slave rebellion in the Atlantic World. By 1804, the
newly independent Haitians, freed by their own hands, had won for themselves a unique inheritance: theirs was a society born of the Age of
Revolutions and animated by the Enlightenment-inspired language of liberty, but equally theirs was a society deeply rooted in African and
Afro-Caribbean slave culture. In its independence, Haiti became the center of a transnational Black diaspora as it defended its existence at
a time when the United States and European colonial powers viewed racial slavery as the pillar of their burgeoning capital economies. This

50

Return to Table of Contents

elective aims to explore these complicated ideas through a variety of texts, digital archives, fiction and nonfiction, literature, and history.
(Ms. Curci and Dr. Jones)
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors. Open to Uppers who have completed at least one term of ENG300 and of HSS300 and who have the
permission of the departments.

Astrobiology: Life Among the Stars
INT506AB (may be taken as a Physics or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is PHY445)
(T3)

We invite you to embark on a journey to explore the field of astrobiology, the study of the origin, evolution, and distribution of life in the
universe, on and beyond planet Earth. We will begin our exploration by studying the fundamentals of relevant sciences—physics, astronomy,
chemistry, and biology—and will then apply these sciences to understand the potential requirements and limitations of life on Earth as well
as on other planets and moons in our solar system. As we learn about historical and current efforts to detect life on these bodies, we will
consider objects resident in our own solar system, including Mars, the moons of Jupiter, the moons of Saturn, and other solar system bodies
such as Ceres and Pluto. Next, we will expand our view to include other possible abodes of life outside of our solar system as discovered
by modern astronomers and modern instrumentation (i.e., the Hubble and Kepler space telescopes). Finally, we will examine the role of
fictional alien biology on the human imagination through literature, film, and music.

Natural Causes: How Climate Change Wrote History
INT507NC (may be taken as a History, Science, or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is HSS593)
(T2)

The impact of human activity on the behavior of the earth’s climate has become one of the overriding concerns of the modern world, making
climate change the central environmental problem of our time. Anticipating the impact of climate change on modern civilization, however,
is not an easy exercise. Past climate change can help us to understand it as a catalyst for change that humans were not aware of, and can then
help us to decide the role humans have played in the current environmental situation.
Through a series of case studies, we will investigate how civilizations have been influenced by weather and climate change. Starting with a
historical overview of broad changes in climate, students will investigate specific instances when weather has influenced the course of his­
tory. How, for example, did winter weather protect Russia from invasion by first Sweden, then Napoleonic France and Nazi Germany? We
will then expand our scope to examine the larger and longer-term influence of climate shifts on the course of regional civilizations such as
the Maya in Central America, the Tang Dynasty in China, and the Harappan/Indus Valley civilization. The third group of case studies will
examine the impact of global climate shifts on the interaction between civilizations on a continental scale. Examples could include the rise
and spread of the Mongol civilization from central Asia to Eastern Europe and eastern Asia. We will end the term by examining the possible
consequences of climate change on the future course of modern civilization. (Dr. Hagler and Ms. Doheny)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed any term of HSS3000.

Project-Based Statistics
INT509PSA (may be taken as a Math or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is MTH539A)
INT509PSB (may be taken as a Math or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is MTH539B)
INT509PSC (may be taken as a Math or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is MTH539C)
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

This is a community-based learning statistics course that will enable students to implement learned knowledge to work with communities. This curriculum-driven project contains a civic responsibility component, which ties in with the school’s major core values. Students
will apply their knowledge immediately and beneficially as they “bring numbers to life” in collaboration with the PA community and local
nonprofit organizations. For instance, students potentially would be able to collect, organize, interpret, analyze, and project data to help the
Admissions Office, Summer Programs Office, Dining Services, Brace Center for Gender Studies, College Counseling Office, Archives and
Special Collections, and other departments of interest at PA. Similarly, students can assist worthy causes in the wider community, working with those entities to tell stories with numbers. Please note the three-term commitment. Students should expect that petitions to drop
INT509 after one or two terms will be denied.
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed MTH350 or with permission of the department.

Human Origins
INT510HO (may be taken as a Science or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is SCI470)
(T2)

Take a look around. Regardless of where you are, the consequence of three million years of human evolution is evident. This interdisciplinary
science course uses insights drawn from history, art, archaeology, and other disciplines to chart the human journey from hominid to the first
civilizations that forecast the modern world. Human Origins includes weekly field or laboratory work outside of the classroom; hands-on
laboratory exercises emphasize use of Peabody Museum of Archaeology collections and challenge students to apply ancient techniques to
solve daily problems of survival. (Dr. Wheeler)
Prerequisite: Open to Uppers and Seniors.

Lynn Nottage
INT511LN (may be taken as an English, Theatre, or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG531LN)
(T3)

One credit assigned in Theatre, English, or Interdisciplinary.
Lynn Nottage is currently the first and only two-time Pulitzer Prize–winning woman playwright. Her notable works include Sweat and
Intimate Apparel, and many of them explore the world of working-class Black Americans. This course will explore her works and their
impact in shaping current dramatic literature and performance. (Mr. Grimm)

51

Return to Table of Contents

The World Viewed
INT511CS (may be taken as an English, Art or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG511CS)
(T3)

As the late historian Daniel J. Boorstin noted, with the addition of sound in the late 1920s, film became what Richard Wagner and other
artists had long sought: the Gesamtkunstwerk, the total work of art. Utilizing aspects of architecture, literature, music, painting, photography, and theater, film became the most popular form of art in the world and the dominant form of the 20th century. This course introduces
students to the study of film, helps them develop the skills necessary to read and analyze film, and provides them with a survey of some of
the major movements and genres in film history. While we consider the cultural and historical context of the evolving art of film in various
countries, our primary concern is the close, formal analysis of the individual films we screen. (Mr. Fox)
Note: This course meets three days each week for two consecutive periods. Students who complete the course earn two credits and should
expect to devote fourteen to eighteen, rather than the usual seven to nine, hours to the course each week, including homework and class time.

What Is Critique?
INT512WC (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG530WC)
(T1)

One credit assigned in Interdisciplinary or English. This interdisciplinary course is a survey of questions and ideas about art, literature, and
society, their natures, their functions, their meanings, and their values. What about a work makes it look like it looks or read like it reads? What
gives a work meaning, and how does it do so? What makes a work good, and how do we justify it as such? What are the conse­quences of judging some works good and others not, of inclusion and exclusion? Who gets to judge—historically, white men—and how do those judgments
establish and reflect the norms and values of societies as a whole? How might we understand and assess “critique” itself as a form of empowerment against injustice, as in Michel Foucault’s estimation, an “instrument for those who fight, resist, and who no longer want what is?”
To address these questions and others, we will read the works of many challenging theorists, and we will apply their thinking to various art,
film, and fiction. (Mr. Fox)

Asian/American Literature and Film
INT514AS1 (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG541AS)*
INT514AS3 (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG543AS)*
(T1, T3)

This seminar explores the literary, historical, and broader sociocultural development of the complex and ever-expanding body of work that
collectively (and not always neatly) contributes to what may be called “Asian/American” literature and film. We will engage with a wide
range of written and visual texts, including poetry, fiction, memoir, cinema, and television, as well as with scholarly and other artistic forms
of production, in order to fashion an analytical framework, informed perspective, and interpretive approach through which to reread and
rethink the culture, politics, and history of the United States itself. A related goal is to understand the role of literature and other cultural
forms in our nation’s struggles over identity, power, and resources. Focusing on the development and representation of Asian/America, we
will unpack the social formation of race and the complexity of racial dynamics in the United States historically and today.
ENG541AS1, Term 1—The syllabus includes works by canonical and popular authors, filmmakers, and content creators. To develop and flex
our critical tools and skills of reading, viewing, analyzing, and interpreting these written and visual texts, we will learn about and practice
applying fundamental concepts, themes, and critical methodologies of the field of Asian/American literary and cultural studies. Our goal in
this seminar is to gain wide exposure to the exciting diversity of Asian/American literature, film, and cultural production.
ENG543AS, Term 3—Placing Asian America: Ethnic Enclaves in Literature and Film. This special topics seminar is organized around a
broad theme such as Asian/American activism, Asian in the U.S. Literary Imagination, or a specific genre, historical period, or geographic or
cultural region (e.g., Viet Nam or Chinatowns). (M. Martin)
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors. Open to Uppers who have completed at least one term of ENG300 and who have the permission of the department.

Advanced Topics in Chinese
INT516CH (may be taken as a Chinese or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is CHI622)*
(T2)

CHI622, Term 2—LGBTQ+ Literature and Media in China. It might be surprising to many that there has been a literary and social media
movement toward LGBTQ+ advocacy in China and other parts of Asia at the grassroots level. Working within a unique system of political
censorship in China grounded in Confucianistic beliefs, LGBTQ+ literature is thriving through a variety of forms of literacy including online
books, manga, anime, audio drama, television shows and social media. This literary movement is entirely consistent with the traditional
Chinese culture and a history of the oppressed people fighting for freedom of expression and justice in creative ways. In this course, students
will read works from the “Pure Love” genre – the literary genre that advocates for the idea of “love is love, regardless of gender,” with a focus
on works about Chinese high school students’ lives. Students will also explore various forms of popular media that feature transgender and
gender non-conforming people in order to better understand the concept of gender expressions within the Chinese context. Students will
reflect on how this movement is both a manifestation of deeply ingrained Chinese values such as staying true to oneself and showing resilience in the face of obstacles, and a continuation of the tradition of using literature for collective healing and empowerment.
CHI622, Term 3—Chinglish. Chinglish is a comedy about an American businessman trying to strike deals in China and the miscommunication that ensured. It was written by the Chinese American playwright and Tony Award winner David Henry Hwang, and opened on
Broadway in 2011. In this course, students will read, study and perform Scenes 1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 12 and 13 of this bilingual play. As part of the
coursework, students will reflect on the expected and unexpected differences in language, cultures, customs and manners, as well as how
humor can transcend languages—even when things are not so easily translatable.

52

Return to Table of Contents

A Room of Their Own: Women’s Studies and Literature
INT517WW1 (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG541WW)*
INT517WW2 (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG542WW)*
INT517WW3 (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG543WW)*
(T1, T2, T3)

ENG541WW, Term 1—Virginia Woolf. The fall term of this women’s and gender studies course will focus on the author of its namesake,
Virginia Woolf, to build an understanding of the complicated emergence of “women’s literature” as a genre. Iconic, revolutionary, and not
without her own shortcomings, Woolf fundamentally reimagined the novel’s potential to reflect internal experiences of womanhood, queerness, and non-normativity, while her nonfiction articulated economic and cultural obstacles facing woman-identified writers. Reading the
arc of her aesthetic development, paired with her essays and diaries, students will explore Woolf ’s individual evolution as an artist as well
as her lasting significance. Together we will develop the muscles to speak and write with intersectional nuance about literature’s capacity to
interrogate gender’s impact and mutability.
ENG542WW, Term 2—We will continue to deepen and expand our engagement with feminist discourse by reading texts that explore complicated dynamics around romance, sexuality, and power. We will read a range of woman-identified writers as they navigate intimacy and
desire and a struggle to exist within or beyond marriage and the domestic. Together, we will pose questions about the potential for feminine
freedom in romantic entanglement across history, culture, and identity, and contend with how often these narratives must also explore the
potential (or lack thereof ) for economic freedom. Authors may include Sally Rooney, Jane Austen, Toni Morrison, Katie Kitamura, Jean
Rhys, Zadie Smith, Alice Munro, Charlotte Bronte, Jo Hamya, or Raven Leilani.
ENG543WW, Term 3—In the 2016 comedy Bad Moms, Kristen Bell’s character, a stay-at-home mom named Kiki, galvanizes her fellow
moms, saying, “We don’t quit! Moms don’t quit! Quitting is for dads.” Though intended to garner a laugh, the moment points to a deeply
held belief that seems to cut across vast swaths of time and culture: that motherhood should be the single defining experience of a woman’s
life, and that mothers who “quit,” in one form or another, are monstrous or out of step with a gender-defining instinct to nurture. This term,
we’ll explore the intersectional specter of The Mom in literature, film, and television, paying particular attention to the recent rise of memoirs and novels that explore female ambivalence to the project of child rearing. Questions will include: How does motherhood shape cultural
norms around gender? What does it mean to be with or without children in a dominant American culture that centers their production?
And, in a post-Roe world, how do we fathom the shifting landscape of what it means to mother? Authors may include bell hooks, Maggie
Nelson, Rachel Cusk, Edward Albee, Audre Lord, Rivka Galchen, Toni Morrison, William Shakespeare, Jenny Offill, Marilynne Robinson,
Euripides, Alexis Schaitkin, Claire Vaye Watkins, or Sheila Heiti. (Ms. Foushee)
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors. Open to Uppers who have completed at least one term of ENG300 and who have the permission of the department.

Lockdown
INT518LD (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG544LD)*
(T2)

Prisons are a growth industry today in the United States. This course, through a blending of literature, film, and social sciences, will examine
incarceration. By reading novels, memoirs, and poetry and viewing a few films, we can gain a greater appreciation of the psychological
effects of these institutions and the power of art as a means of coping with them (touching then on witnessing and testimonials). We will ask
questions about ethics and justice, about self-expression, and about social control. Some possible titles may include Orange Is the New Black,
Gould’s Book of Fish, The Trial, Brothers and Keepers, A Place to Stand, One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, and Zeitoun. (Dr. Kane)
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors. Open to Uppers who have completed at least one term of ENG300 and who have the permission of the department.

“I See Your True Colors”: Queer Literature
INT519QL (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG541QL)
(T3)

This course examines poems, plays, and stories that raise key questions about sexuality, gender, identity, and desire. Alongside our core
literary texts, we will also consider art, music, and film as well as classic texts in the history and theory of sexuality. Topics may include: gay
liberation; AIDS activism; the closet, passing, and coming out; the relationship between feminism and lesbian practice; trans identities and
narratives; bisexual erasure; queer communities, spaces, and performance; non-normative love and affinity; law, medicine, psychoanalysis,
and religion; homophobia, transphobia, and heterosexism; mental health; debates around same-sex marriage and assimilation; and the
intersections of sexuality with race, class, age, nationality, and ability. (Dr. Gardner)
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors. Open to Uppers who have completed at least one term of ENG300 and who have the permission of the department.

Critical Race Theory: The American Dream Deferred
INT520CR (may be taken as a History or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is HSS574)*
(T3)

Historically, American society does not recognize race as the language of class. In this discussion-based seminar, students will examine ways
in which race and class intersect. Critical race theory eschews the goal of assimilation into current social structure and instead looks at the
experience of the “outsider” as a lighthouse that illuminates structural problems within American Society. Students will use Critical Race
Theory to analyze historical legal cases—including the nation’s first successful school desegregation in 1931 where Mexican Americans sued
San Diego, CA public schools for access and the famous 1957 court-ordered desegregation of Little Rock, AR High school—in addition to
contemporary legal cases of “reverse discrimination” such as Fisher v. The University of Texas in 2012. Students will ultimately explore the
question, “Is the American dream a structural fallacy that has explanation for success but none for failure?” Assignments will consist of
selected readings, reflection pieces, article reviews, and a research paper. (Ms. Paulson)
Prerequisites: Open students who have completed one term of HSS300.

53

Return to Table of Contents

Women’s, Gender, and Sexuality Studies
INT521WG (may be taken as a History or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is HSS509)
(T3)

One credit assigned in History or Interdisciplinary. Pink is for boys and blue is for girls. At least it used to be. We will explore the ways that
our everyday lives are guided by socially prescribed gender norms. Through the study of the historical production and contemporary interpretation of the categories of “woman” and “man,” “female” and “male,” “heterosexual” and “homosexual,” we will seek to better understand
how gender-based inequalities have evolved and are both supported and simultaneously contested in societies across the world. In addition,
we will seek to gain a better understanding of the ways that gender, sex, and sexuality inform local, national, and global efforts to improve
the lives of individuals and to achieve social justice for entire communities. We also will explore the intersection of sexuality, gender, sex,
race, ethnicity, class, and other forms of identity. Through a variety of sources—written documents, social media, film—this course will introduce students to a wide variety of issues across disciplines, including historical, anthropological, medical, legal, and popular culture. We also
will explore contemporary uses of social media as sites of research, activism, and networking. (Dr. Ramos)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

Women in Antiquity
INT524WA (may be taken as a Classics or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is CLA552)*
(T3)

The literary woman in antiquity and the actual woman in antiquity are rather different concepts. In classical literature, we can find numerous examples of powerful, erudite, and accomplished women; however, in classical history, these examples are few. In this course, we will
look at this variance and try to determine how it came to be, especially in societies whose own deities were often female. We will pay close
attention to literary figures such as Helen, Andromache, Medea, Lysistrata, Lucretia, Lesbia, and Dido, and we will examine the life of the
actual woman in the classical world in order to see how her experience compares with her literary counterpart. Although not required, students with experience in Latin or Greek may continue working with ancient texts in the original language.
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors or with permission of the department.

Rebels, Gods, and Villains in Central American Literature
INT525CA (may be taken as an English, or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG525CA)*
(T2)

The rich history of Central America, an isthmus extending from Guatemala to Panama, is one of resilience and resistance. Ancient traditions
and civilizations, like the Mayans, continue to persist. It is the home of Cimarrones, or Maroons, rebel enslaved African people who freed
themselves and established joint colonies with Indigenous populations. It is the home of the Garifuna, whose history is one of sea exploration and survival. This legacy of never bending at the sight of impossible odds continues to this day with a long history of writer-activists
like Julia Esquivel Velásquez, Pedro Rivera, Carlos Francisco Chang Marín, Rigoberta Menchú, and Rubén Darío. The literature we will
explore will focus on stories and poems about communal power, rebel heroes, and the diverse cultural history that empowers an entire
region. This class will expose you to comparative literature analysis and project options ranging from podcast creation to poetry translation.
Books for this course might include: Popol Vuh retold by Victor Montejo; Family Album by Claribel Alegría; I, Rigoberta Menchú: An Indian
Woman in Guatemala by Rigoberta Menchú; Stories and Poems/Cuentos y Poesías: A Dual Language by Rubén Darío; Catrachos by Roy
G. Guzmán; Come Together, Fall Apart by Cristina Henríquez; Black Caribs—Garifuna Saint Vincent’ Exiled People and the Origin of the
Garifuna ed. by Tomás Alberto Ávila. (Ms. Leschorn)

An Introductory Survey of African American Literature
INT532AA1 (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is (ENG541AA)*
INT532AA2 (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is (ENG542AA)*
INT532AA3 (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is (ENG543AA)*
(T1, T2, T3)

This seminar course offers an overview of African American literature through reading and writing assignments, discussions, student-led
seminars, and visiting lecturers on art, music, and history. Trips to museums and jazz or blues club performances enhance the students’
appreciation of cultural contexts. The fall term focuses on the early writings, on the literature of slavery and freedom, and on the literature of
Reconstruction. In the winter, students read the literature of the Harlem Renaissance and African American expressions of realism, naturalism, and modernism. In the spring, the Black Arts Movement and African American literatures, including film and drama, since the 1970s
are the foci of the course. (Ms. Albert)

Youth from Every Quarter
INT533YQ (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG530YQ)*
(T2)

Decades before the public education reforms of Horace Mann, Phillips Academy was founded as a school that “shall be ever equally open to
Youth, of requisite qualifications, from every quarter.” This term, we will interrogate the three words often omitted from this statement of egalitarian ideal: “of requisite qualifications.” By developing historical and contemporary understandings of Phillips Academy itself, we will explore
issues of effort, merit, and privilege. When the Academy was founded, what constituted qualification? Who determined it, for what purposes,
and with what consequences? How have answers to these questions evolved during the last 238 years, and why? How might the Academy
become an “anti-racist” institution or, more broadly, one that actively dismantles structures of power? Is that even possible? (Mr. Fox)
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors. Open to Uppers who have completed at least one term of ENG300 and who have the permission of the department.

54

Return to Table of Contents

Feminist Philosophies
INT534FP (may be taken as a Philosophy and Religious Studies or Interdisciplinary course;
official course number is PHR522)*
(T3)

One credit assigned in Philosophy and Religious Studies or Interdisciplinary. This course will address feminist moral and political
theories. There is no singular ‘feminism’, and feminists disagree with each other on the answers to many of those moral and political claims.
We will survey a variety of feminisms, including liberal and radical feminisms, womanism, and others. The course will also cover topics
including sex and gender, the nature of oppression, intersectionality (including discussions of race, disability, gender identity, and class),
and sexual ethics. Special topics will be chosen by students for further focus, but could include topics such as body shaming, trafficking, or
understandings of masculinity.
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors. Open to Uppers who have completed a 300-level course and with permission of the department.

Ethics and Technology
INT535ET (may be taken as a Philosophy and Religious Studies or Interdisciplinary course;
official course number is PHR532)
(T3)

One credit assigned in Philosophy and Religious Studies or Interdisciplinary. From the use of fire to written natural and computational
languages to advances in agriculture, weaponry, industry, science, medicine, communication, and artificial intelligence, human technologies
have transformed our world. They also have added new complexities to the challenge of answering fundamental philosophical questions.
This course examines the ethical context around the design and implementation of various forms of technology. Subject areas include but
are not limited to: the nature and value of privacy, algorithmic bias, inclusive design, the ethics of AI, and the politics of technological systems. (Dr. Bhardwaj)

Ethics: Medicine
INT538ME (may be taken as a Philosophy and Religious Studies or Interdisciplinary course;
official course number is PHR530)
(T3)

One credit assigned in Philosophy and Religious Studies or Interdisciplinary. Modern medical research and practice present society
with new opportunities and significant challenges. Students in this course will look at various case studies at the intersection of medicine,
scientific research, health care, and ethics. Possible case studies may include debates about abortion, euthanasia, animal rights, and broader
environmental implications of scientific and material progress in the 21st century. Classical and contemporary philosophers will be read as
part of our investigation into these topics. (Dr. Bhardwaj)

Asian/American Dramatic Literature
INT541DR (may be taken as an English, Theatre, or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG541DR)
(T2)

This course explores the ever-expanding body of work that collectively (and not always neatly) contributes to what may be called “Asian/
American” dramatic literature. Students will read and engage with plays by Asian American dramatists from the 20th- and 21st-century
through the lenses of class, faith, gender, sexual orientation, and other socially constructed markers and dimensions of human experience
and identity, with a particular focus on the social formation of race and the complexity of racial dynamics in the United States historically
and today. Additional material will be examined so that we can better understand the role of dramatic literature in our nation’s struggles
over identity, power, resources, and representation. (Mr. Grimm & M. Martin)

Indigenous Literature
INT541IL (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG541IL)
(T2)

What does it mean to be a Native American writer in the 21st century? In this Senior elective course, students will explore life on and off the
Native American reservation in works produced by writers from a wide variety of Indigenous communities in the United States. The course
will involve navigating issues/topics a propos to Native American studies, such as colonialism and genocide, cultural survival, and political and environmental activism. Possible writers to be studied: Luci Tapahonso, Evelina Zuni Lucero, Sherman Alexie, Paula Gunn Allen,
Leslie Marmon Silko, Ramson Lomatewama, Simon Ortiz, nila northSun, Joy Harjo, Gerald Vizenor, Louise Erdrich, Diane Glancy, Winona
LaDuke, Anton Treur, Wendy Rose, and Linda Hogan. (Dr. Driscoll)

“I See Your True Colors”: Queer Literature
INT541QL (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG541QL)
(T3)

One credit assigned in English or Interdisciplinary. This course examines poems, plays, and stories that raise key questions about sexuality,
gender, identity, and desire. Alongside our core literary texts, we will also consider art, music, and film as well as classic texts in the history
and theory of sexuality. Topics may include: gay liberation; AIDS activism; the closet, passing, and coming out; the relationship between feminism and lesbian practice; trans identities and narratives; bisexual erasure; queer communities, spaces, and performance; non-normative
love and affinity; law, medicine, psychoanalysis, and religion; homophobia, transphobia, and heterosexism; mental health; debates around
same-sex marriage and assimilation; and the intersections of sexuality with race, class, age, nationality, and ability. (Dr. Gardner)
Prerequisites: Open to Seniors. Open to Uppers who have completed at least one term of ENG300 and who have the permission of the
department.

55

Return to Table of Contents

Identity
INT542ID (may be taken as a Theatre or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is THD910)*
(T1)

This course explores the intersection of writing and performance through an investigation of personal identity and will be taught collaboratively by instructors who specialize in each area. The course will culminate in a performance of a devised theatre piece of the student’s
creation before a live audience. Designed for students with acting experience and a serious commitment to the art form, students will build
off their existing skills through in-depth character work and scene study and push their understanding of themselves and acting by exploring
their own identity. Students will be encouraged to “think theatrical,” or think theatrically, engaging in a search for the connection between
literary themes, historical context, and personal identity. Over the term, the class will gain insight into the roles that race, class, gender,
sexual orientation, and faith affects our daily existence and live performance. Lastly, students will experience and examine how live performance interacts with public discourse, civil disobedience, and art.
Prerequisites: Open Lowers, Uppers, and Seniors.

Financial Literacy Seminar
INT543FL (may be taken as a Math or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is MTH440)
(T1, T3)

Students who sign up for this course will be able to utilize their skills, passion, and creativity in a way that will definitely make an impact
on the world. The instructor will present and explore models theoretically and practically to promote fiscally responsible behavior. Students
will read and discuss several short books and research and design collaborative projects to demonstrate proficiency of concepts learned and
to help develop a solid foundation of critical financial skills. Concepts will include a wide array of topics, including budgeting, writing and
pitching business plans, marketing, prototyping, project planning, balance sheets, income and cash flow statements, resume writing, online
advertising and social media marketing, graphic design, philanthropy, and much more.
With the guidance of the instructor as well as mentors and specialists, students will use the “design thinking” process to identify a problem
of a social nature and follow all the steps necessary to provide feasible and scalable solutions. Working to solve a problem creatively and
logically will ignite their entrepreneurial spirit. When possible, field trips will include company tours, shareholder meetings, and visits to
brokerage firms. Guest speakers such as financial planners, business leaders, accountants, artists, and actuaries will speak to students and
share their expertise. (Mr. El Alam)
An HP10BII financial calculator will be used extensively as a learning tool and is required for the course.
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed MTH340.

Ethics and the Environment
INT544EE (may be taken as a Philosophy and Religious Studies or Interdisciplinary course;
official course number is PHR531)
(T1, T3)

One credit assigned in Philosophy and Religious Studies or Interdisciplinary. We are facing unprecedented environmental challenges
to climate, life forms, human health and population, and essential resources. We tend to treat such issues simply as scientific or political
problems. In reality, ecological controversies raise fundamental questions about what we human beings value, the kind of beings we are, the
kinds of lives we should lead, and our place in nature. Sustainability is not possible without a deep change of values and commitment. In
short, environmental problems raise fundamental questions of ethics and philosophy. This course seeks to provide a systematic introduction
to those questions. (Dr. Hay)

Environmental Economics
INT545EE (may be taken as a History and Social Science, Science, or Interdisciplinary course;
official course number is SCI504)
(T3)

One credit assigned in History and Science, Science, or Interdisciplinary. This course is a case-based introduction to using econom­ics
to look at some of the major environmental problems in the 21st century. In this topic-driven course, students will learn about the role of
market failure in environmental issues, the challenges of pricing environmental goods, and ways in which economic theory can be used to
help solve these problems. Topics such as overfishing, global warming, water pollution, and others will be covered from the angles of science
and economics. Special consideration of the unique role that social justice plays in many of the topics will be considered as well. Students
will be assessed on problem sets, essays, in-class discussions, and an individual research project. (Mr. Parker and Mr. Robinson)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed one term of HSS300.

Public Displays of Affection: Studies of Romance and Desire in Culture
INT545PD (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG545PD)
INT546PD (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG546PD)
INT547PD (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG546PD)
(T1, T2, T3)

Rooted in queer of color critique and ethnic studies, this interdisciplinary course interrogates how American social norms and ideas of “the
good life” both shape and are shaped by popular culture. (Dr. Raymundo)
ENG545PD, Term 1—Norms and Narrative Forms. We begin by examining the “marriage plot” as it emerged in 17th- and 18th-century
English literature, interrogating the historical contexts through which marriage and the reproductive family—entwined as those notions are
with norms of whiteness, bodies, and property—have come to be framed as both social ideals and narrative horizons in the West. We will
then move on to examining how contemporary popular narrative forms, such as the rom-com, the sit-com, and the domestic drama, extend
(or challenge) the entanglement between narrative and norm. Potential texts include Much Ado About Nothing, Othello, Pride and Prejudice,
Jane Eyre, Friends, New Girl, Bridgerton, and The White Lotus.

56

Return to Table of Contents

ENG546PD, Term 2—Romancing the Nation. In the winter term, we will examine narratives of colonial desire and interracial romance.
How, and why, have international power dynamics been imagined as relations between individuals? In what ways have cultural discourses of
love, kinship, and desire been mobilized by the modern nation-state? How do both the fears of miscegenation and the fantasies of multiculturalism shape American culture, both past and present? Potential texts include The English Patient, The Vanishing Half, The Sympathizer,
Caucasia, White Teeth, and Such a Fun Age.
ENG547PD, Term 3—Nuclear Decay. In the spring term, we will focus on the nuclear family and the suburbs as sites of fantasy and decay
in American culture. In the first half to the term, we will examine critiques of the 1950s vision of the good life from those banished to its
margins. In the second, we will explore contemporary novels which set millennial dreams of stability and wealth accumulation against a
background of abandoned suburbs, economic catastrophes, and violent conflict. In an age of infinite war, climate disasters, and AI, how
might notions of private and public, intimacy and kinship, and love and desire evolve? Potential texts include Revolutionary Road, The
Hours, Fences, Gone Girl, Leave the World Behind, Severance, and Broken Harbor.

Contemporary Drama
INT547DR (may be taken as an English, Theatre or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG512DR)
(T1)

This course will be devoted to major dramatists from the late 20th- and early 21st-century. Each term, students will read plays through
the lenses of race, class, faith, gender, sexual orientation, and other socially constructed markers. We will attempt to locate the playwrights
within and counter to social movements and approach their plays through historical, cultural, and political contexts. Students will analyze
how the best playwrights pose and dramatize important questions of the time through both writing and staging. (Mr. Grimm)
ENG512DR, Term 1—American Drama. Playwrights studied may include August Wilson, Susan-Lori Parks, David Henry Hwang, Anna
Deavere Smith, Nilos Cruz, Quiarra Alegria Hudes, Tony Kushner, Paula Vogel, Jose Rivera, and Lynn Nottage.
ENG513DR, Term 3—World Drama. Playwrights studied may include Yazmina Reza, Lara Foote, Sara Kane, Maria Irene Fornes, Athol
Fugard, Danai Guerra, and Wajdi Mouawad.

Strange Worlds
INT547SW (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG518SF)
(T1, T3)

The speculative fiction genre collects fantastical elements, imagined histories, and impossible futures. To write and read a story in this genre
is to speculate, to theorize about changing just a few things about the world and see what happens. In this course, we will focus primarily on
writers of color who are best at re-imagining a world that re-centers marginalized narratives to redefine what is possible in terms of gender,
race, ethnicity, history, climate, and, above all, power structures. Along with studying this genre, we will create our own narratives that theorize a world in which our current limitations vanish, and we let our characters find their own forms of liberation. You will learn about craft,
lead discussions, write weekly, and produce your own short fiction piece. (Ms. Leschorn)

Black Oratorical Power
INT548OR (may be taken as an English or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is ENG513OR)
(T2, T3)

For centuries, countries and institutions have relied on the orator as means of disseminating information, challenging authority, and building community. The United States progressed during the 19th- and 20th-centuries because of Black orators exercising their power and brilliance as means of galvanizing, inspiring, and radicalizing populations to recognize and reject injustice. In this course, students will critique,
read, discuss, and listen to speeches delivered by powerful Black orators throughout U.S. history. These speakers considered the issues of
racism, sexism, and patriarchy as they fought to systemically deliver justice for all people. Authors studied may include Frederick Douglass,
W.E.B. DuBois, Booker T. Washington, Kathleen Cleaver, Angela Davis, Ralph Ellison, and others. (Mr. English)

The William Sloane Coffin Jr. ’42 Colloquium Series
This colloquium series brings instructors from across the Academy to engage students in a particular topic. Typically, approximately 15
faculty members representing a half dozen departments participate in the colloquia. Previous topics have included Bob Dylan; Justice, Law,
Tyranny; London: Harbinger of Modernity; Charles Darwin; Relativity, Incompleteness, and Subjectivity; Youth from Every Quarter; Things
Fall Apart; The Storm; Martin Luther King Jr.; and Conservatism.

The Will of the People
ENG590CO (may be taken as an English, History and Social Science, or Interdisciplinary course)

Article 21 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides that “The will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government; this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine elections which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret
vote or by equivalent free voting procedures.” With its origins in Jean Jaques Rousseau and Social Contract theory, the “will of the people”
has taken on a variety of meanings and use in law, society, and culture; it is at once a metric for progress and prosperity in a state and a
necessary component for what it means for an individual and society to be free. And at its core, this fundamental idea of government by the
people—with free elections as its necessary mechanism—serves as the basis for the theory of our constitution and the ideals of democracy.
It would not be hyperbole to say that 2024 marks the height of governance by the will of people in all of human history. Indeed, the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) has called 2024 the biggest election year in history with nearly 60 nations (and half of
the world’s population) holding elections. At the same time, the OHCHR notes that these elections are occurring amidst significant declines
in democratic institutions and deep skepticism that democracy and elections work. What are the factors that contribute to this paradox of
democracy that our world now faces?
President Franklin D. Roosevelt famously said, “Democracy cannot succeed unless those who express their choice are prepared to choose
wisely. The real safeguard of democracy, therefore, is education.” In this colloquium, students will examine what it means to be a democratic

57

Return to Table of Contents

citizen in today’s society, exploring the complex role of elections in our governing institutions and the multitude of challenges that democracy faces. This interdisciplinary course will tackle the topic of democracy and elections through a variety of disciplines–history, law, literature, mathematics, philosophy, and political theory, to name just a few.
Following the model of previous colloquia, we will meet twice each week, and with different members of the faculty leading the class from
week to week. There also may be potential for speakers and guest instructors from outside the academy. (Mr. Calleja, coordinating faculty
from various departments)

58

Return to Table of Contents

Elective Courses Recently Taught but Not Offered in 2024–2025
Special topics in Video: Dance on Camera
INT301DC

Musical Theatre—Dancing Through History
INT302MT

The History and Literature of the Haitian Revolution
INT505HR

Art and Mathematics
INT508AM

August Wilson’s View of the 20th Century:
His Pittsburgh, Our America
INT511AW1

Foundational Gender Theory
INT513GT

Women’s, Gender, and Sexuality Studies
INT521WG

Being, Thinking, Doing
INT522BT

What Is America? What Is American Art?
INT529WA

Media Studies
INT530MS
INT531MS
INT532MS

This Is America
INT531TW

Religion in America: One Nation, Under God(s)?
INT536RA

Bioethics: Humanity in the Post-Genomic Era
INT539BE

Chinglish
INT540AP

Asian History—Asian History Survey: China, Japan, and Korea
INT541AH

Bruce Lee: An Exploration of Race, Identity, and Philosophy
INT546BL

COVID-19, BLM, and the Precarity of Life
INT549CO

59

Return to Table of Contents

MATHEMATICS, STATI STI CS & COMPUTER SCI ENCE
The mathematics curriculum is built around a core sequence of seven to eight terms: three of elementary algebra and geometry, one or two
of intermediate algebra, and two of precalculus topics. The completion of these seven to eight terms will satisfy diploma requirements, but
one or two additional terms of precalculus are required as prerequisites for more advanced courses in calculus, computer science, and statistics. Placement of new students in the appropriate first course is made by the department and is based on the results of an online survey and
placement test that is sent to newly admitted students in the spring. An optional reassessment for placement is offered in the fall for new
students after the first few days of class.
Typically, new 9th-graders entering with little or no prior study of algebra—or who would benefit from a thorough review of
algebra—start with MTH225A. For a student who already has studied algebra and perhaps geometry, our sharply focused and adaptive Math
Placement Test is designed to pinpoint those topics that the student already knows while also indicating those topics to which the student
still needs introduction. With the results of this test, an appropriate initial course is identified so that a student joins our program geared
for success. Similarly, our Math Placement Test is used for students entering as 10th-, 11th-, and 12th-graders and postgraduates. These new
students generally join our curriculum at the 300 or 400 level, again based on the results of the adaptive online test.
The precalculus curriculum focuses on the study of functions. Success in these courses is important in preparation for the challenges of the
advanced courses. To assure success, a student who earns a final grade of 2 or 3 in MTH320, -330, -340, -350 or -360 may, with department
approval, retake the course the following term. A student who is struggling to pass a course required for graduation should speak with their
advisor and teacher about applying for an audit.
The department offers many mathematics electives beyond precalculus, including coursework in Advanced Placement (AP) calculus, multivariable calculus, and linear algebra. We also offer AP Statistics, the full-year Project-Based Statistics, and rotating term-contained electives
in statistics. Our computer science oﬀerings consist of term-contained courses at different skill levels, one independent research course, and
one project-based course.
The majority of students take courses beyond the required level. MTH350 and MTH360 complete the precalculus sequence. The department offers many electives beyond precalculus, some of which lead up to and beyond College Board Advanced Placement (AP) exams in
calculus, statistics, and computer science. We also offer AP Statistics, the full-year Project-Based Statistics, and rotating term-contained
electives in statistics. Our computer science offerings consist of term-contained courses at different skill levels, one independent research
course, and one project-based course.
Every student enrolled in a mathematics course must have a TI-84 graphing calculator. No other models will be used or supported by the
department. No calculator that has CAS (Computer Algebra System) capabilities, including but not limited to the TI-89 and TI Nspire CAS,
may be used for departmental exams.

Required Sequence in Mathematics
Algebra with Geometry
MTH225A
MTH225B
MTH225C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

MTH225A, Term 1—Algebra with Geometry I. This course is for students who demonstrated, through a placement test, the need for a
thorough review of first-year algebra. MTH225A is a three-term sequence covering topics in algebra and geometry. In MTH225A, emphasis
is placed on the manipulative skills of simplifying expressions, solving linear equations, graphing linear functions, and introducing analytic
geometry. This course includes work with word problems, applications from physics, and an introduction to coding.
MTH225B, Term 2—Algebra with Geometry II. This course is the second term of the three-term sequence covering topics in algebra and
geometry. In MTH225B, emphasis is placed on the manipulative skills of factoring polynomials, solving quadratic equations, and solving
area/volume problems. This course includes work with word problems, applications from physics, and continued work on introductory
coding.
MTH225C, Term 3—Algebra with Geometry III. This course is the third term of the three-term sequence covering topics in algebra and
geometry. In MTH225C, emphasis is placed on writing clear and precise solutions, including proofs, in standard Euclidean plane geometry.
Students who successfully complete MTH225C may select MTH300A or MTH320 based on select criteria. See those courses for
prerequisites.

Proof and Problem Solving
MTH275A
MTH275B
MTH275C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

MTH275A, Term 1—Algebra with Geometry I. This course is for students who demonstrated, through a placement test, a strong background in Algebra. MTH275 is a three-term sequence covering topics in advanced algebra and analytic geometry. In MTH275A, geometric
concepts are explored within the coordinate plane and integrated with relevant algebraic topics such as slope, distance, midpoints, and lines.
Students will study congruence, symmetry, and the various characteristics of polygons. Students will also begin to develop an understanding
of deductive reasoning and proof.
MTH275B, Term 2—Algebra with Geometry II. This course is the second term of a three-term sequence covering topics in advanced algebra and analytic geometry. In MTH275B, emphasis is placed on similarity, right triangles, right triangle trigonometry, and circles. Students
will work with proportions; rational, radical, and quadratic expressions; and equations.

60

Return to Table of Contents

MTH275C, Term 3—Algebra with Geometry III. This course is the third term of a three-term sequence covering topics in advanced algebra
and analytic geometry. The focus of MTH275C will be on area and volume. Students will begin to explore the concept of functions and
dependent and independent variables, and further enhance their understanding of geometric concepts.
Students who successfully complete MTH275C may select MTH300A, MTH320, or MTH330 based on select criteria. See those courses for
prerequisites.

Geometry and Precalculus
MTH280A
MTH280B
MTH280C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

A yearlong course for extremely able entering students who have completed with distinction an intermediate algebra course but have not
completed a yearlong geometry course. The course covers Euclidean geometry (both synthetic and coordinate) and elementary functions.
This course completes the diploma requirement and prepares students to enroll in MTH380.
Prerequisite: Placement by the department.

Fundamentals for Precalculus
MTH300A
MTH300B
(T1, T2) TWO-TERM COMMITMENT

A two-term course for students who have completed a yearlong geometry course, Fundamentals for Precalculus covers topics in intermediate
algebra (as listed in the course description of MTH320) and emphasizes algebra skills required for success in precalculus. Upon successful
completion of MTH300, students will be prepared for MTH330.
Prerequisite: For new students, placement by the department. For returning students, earning a 4 or below in either MTH225A or
MTH225B.

Precalculus
MTH320
(T1)

Topics include properties of real numbers; factoring; fractional and negative exponents; radicals; absolute value; solutions of linear, quadratic, and radical equations; systems of equations and inequalities; and word problems. In addition, students are introduced to the more
advanced features of the TI-84 Plus graphing calculator.
Prerequisite: MTH225, MTH275 or for new students an equivalent experience and placement by department. Students with no grade lower
than a 5 in MTH225A AND MTH225B may select between MTH300A and MTH320. Students with 6s in MTH225A AND MTH225B are
highly encouraged to enroll.

Precalculus
MTH330
(T1, T2, T3)

An introduction and exploration of functions with abstraction. Multiple representations of a function—as a table of values, as a graph, and
as an algebraic rule—are a central theme. Elementary functions (polynomial functions, in particular) and their transformations, compositions, inverses, and applications are emphasized.
Prerequisite: For new students, placement by the department. For returning students, MTH320 or 6s in MTH275A and MTH275B, and
demonstrated excellence on the spring 330 placement exam. Students who earn a grade of 2 or 3 may retake the course.

Precalculus
MTH340
(T1, T2, T3)

This course focuses on rational, exponential, and logarithmic functions. The TI-84 Plus is used for continued study of non-linear data sets
with special attention to sets that grow exponentially and logarithmically. Note that entering Seniors whose prior work has not satisfied the
diploma requirement must complete MTH340 or MTH400.
Prerequisite: MTH330 or its equivalent. Students who earn a grade of 2 or 3 may retake the course.

Precalculus Trigonometry
MTH350
(T1, T2, T3)

An exploration of the circular functions: sine, cosine, and tangent. Topics include right triangle trigonometry, simple harmonic motion,
applications, and proofs of trigonometric identities.
Prerequisite: MTH340 or its equivalent. Students who earn a grade of 2 or 3 may retake the course.

61

Return to Table of Contents

Precalculus Parametric and Polar Curves
MTH360
(T1, T2, T3)

Students will continue their study of trigonometry from MTH350. They will learn how to represent points, sketch curves, and describe
motion in two-dimensional space using parametric equations, and polar coordinates. Elementary work with arithmetic and geometric
sequences is included.
Prerequisite: MTH350 or its equivalent. Students who earn a grade of 2 or 3 may retake the course.

Off-Cycle Precalculus Sequence
MTH330 (T3)
MTH340 (T1)
MTH350 (T2)
MTH360 (T3)

The off-cycle sequence of our precalculus curriculum covers the same topics as the course sequences that start with MTH330 in Term 1 and
Term 2. However, the topics are covered in less depth and with greater focus on essential skills and concepts. This course sequence is recommended for students who complete MTH300 during their lower or upper years or who are challenged by the pace and depth of our on-cycle
sequence. Students who complete this sequence with a grade of 4 or better are prepared to take MTH575. All other students are prepared to
take MTH510 or MTH530.

Accelerated Precalculus
MTH380A
MTH380B
(T1, T2) TWO-TERM COMMITMENT

This two-term course begins with a review of polynomial functions and proceeds to cover logarithmic, exponential, and trigonometric
functions, inverse functions, parametric equations, polar coordinates, matrices, vectors, complex numbers, and sequences and series. Upon
successful completion of MTH380, students will be ready to study MTH580.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of MTH280 with a grade of 4 or higher or placement by the department.

Elementary Functions
MTH400
(T1)

A course primarily for entering Seniors who need to satisfy the diploma requirements in mathematics. The course focuses on functions
and their applications, including polynomial, exponential, logarithmic, circular, and trigonometric functions. Strong emphasis is placed on
graphing and the use of graphs as an aid in problem solving.
Prerequisite: Credit for three years of high school mathematics or permission of the department.

Advanced Mathematics
Financial Literacy Seminar
MTH440 (may be taken as a Math or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is INT543FL)
(T1, T3)

One credit assigned in Mathematics or Interdisciplinary. Students build on their understanding of Precalculus to apply mathematical
concepts such as exponential and logarithmic functions to model the power of compounding, and models to understand the advantages and
disadvantages of different payment types. Students learn probability models and their properties along with statistical concepts to explore
topics related to Portfolio Theory, and several financial terms to address problems on Time Value of Money including effective rates and
amortization schedules.
In addition, students utilize their interdisciplinary skills, passion, and creativity in ways that make a positive impact on various communities. Students explore the themes of ethical and philanthropic responsibility. They learn theoretical and practical models to explain financial
behavior, and how financial power impacts individuals and communities. Student readings focus on financial topics, and class discussions
construct and explore real life narratives to build empathy and to understand the ethics of financial decisions.
With the guidance of the instructor as well as occasional guest speakers, students utilize the Design Thinking Process as a protocol to identify a problem of a social nature. They engage in extensive research and use effective communication skills to provide feasible and socially
responsible solutions for the common good. (Mr. El Alam)
An HP10BII financial calculator will be used extensively as a learning tool and is required for the course.
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed MTH340.

Introduction to Calculus
MTH500A
MTH500B
(T2, T3) TWO-TERM COMMITMENT

Primarily for Seniors. Topics include rates of change, limits, derivatives, and antiderivatives.
Prerequisite: MTH350, MTH400, or an equivalent course in trigonometry and elementary functions.

62

Return to Table of Contents

Calculus
MTH510
(T1)

Primarily for Seniors. Topics include rates of change, limits, derivatives, and antiderivatives.
Prerequisite: MTH360 or its equivalent or permission of the department chair.

Calculus
MTH520A
MTH520B
(T2, T3) TWO-TERM COMMITMENT

This is a continuation of MTH510. Topics covered include the definite integral, the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, further differentiation of functions, techniques, and applications of integration. The most successful students will be in a position to do the AB Advanced
Placement examination in calculus.
Prerequisite: A grade of 3 or higher in MTH510 or permission of the department.

AP AB Calculus I
MTH560
(T3)

This is the beginning of the three-term calculus sequence that, together with covers the syllabus of the AB Advanced Placement examination. This term focuses primarily on differential calculus: limits, continuity, derivatives, and applications of derivatives. Graphical, numerical, and analytic methods will be used throughout the course.
Prerequisite: MTH360 or its equivalent, with no grade lower than a 3 in MTH340, -350 and -360.

AP AB Calculus II
MTH570A
MTH570B
(T1, T2) TWO-TERM COMMITMENT

This course continues the work of MTH560 finishing the syllabus for the AB Advanced Placement Examination. Topics include optimization, integration, applications of integration, slope fields, and separable differential equations. Graphical, numerical, and analytic methods
will be used throughout the course.
Prerequisite: MTH560 completed with at least a 3 or MTH580.

AP Accelerated AB Calculus
MTH575A
MTH575B
MTH575C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

A three-term commitment in calculus that begins only in Term 1. Satisfactory completion of this course prepares students for the College
Board AB Advanced Placement exam. This course does not prepare students for MTH650.
Prerequisite: MTH360 or its equivalent, with no grade lower than a 4 in MTH340, -350, and -360. Those students who do not meet this
requirement should take either MTH510 or MTH530.

AP AB Calculus III
MTH578
(T3)

This course is a comprehensive review of the AB Advanced Placement topics before the AP exam in May. Post-AP topics may include one or
more BC topics. Graphical, numerical, and analytic methods will be used throughout the course.
Prerequisite: Completion of MTH570.

AP BC Calculus I
MTH580
(T3)

This is the beginning of a four-term calculus sequence recommended for students who are well prepared in precalculus. With MTH590 it
covers the syllabus of the BC Calculus Advanced Placement examination. Topics covered include primarily differential calculus: limits, continuity, derivatives, the Chain Rule, related rates, and the Mean Value Theorem. Some integral calculus is also covered. Graphical, numerical,
and analytic methods are used throughout the course.
Prerequisite: MTH360 or its equivalent, with no grade lower than a 4 in MTH340, -350, and -360. Those students who do not meet this
requirement should take either MTH510 or MTH560. Students who have taken MTH560 are not eligible for this course.

63

Return to Table of Contents

AP BC Calculus II
MTH590A
(T1)

This course continues the work of MTH580 in preparation for the BC Advanced Placement examination. Topics include integration and
applications of integral calculus.
Prerequisite: MTH580 completed with a grade of at least a 4, MTH570B or MTH575 completed with a grade of 5 or better, or permission of
the department.

AP BC Calculus III
MTH590B
MTH590C
(T2, T3) TWO-TERM COMMITMENT

A continuation of MTH590, finishing the syllabus for the BC Advanced Placement examination.
Prerequisite: MTH590A completed with a grade of 3 or better, MTH570B or MTH575 completed with a grade of 5 or better, or permission of
the department.

AP Accelerated BC Calculus
MTH595A
MTH595B
MTH595C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

A three-term commitment in calculus that begins only in Term 1. Enrollment is limited to the most able mathematics students. Satisfactory
completion of this course prepares students for the College Board BC Advanced Placement exam. In order to qualify for this course, returning students must perform satisfactorily on a special precalculus qualifying examination given in the previous Term 3.
Prerequisite: MTH360 or its equivalent, with no grade lower than a 5 in MTH340, -350, and -360, plus permission of the department and
demonstrated excellence on the MTH595 qualifying exam.

Honors Mathematics Seminar
MTH630
(T1, T2, T3)

*Priority enrollment: Students who completed MTH660 are given priority for enrollment in MTH630. Students who have completed
MTH660 may request MTH630 in PCR during the course request period. Others meeting the prerequisite may request MTH630 during the
add/drop period. Questions regarding priority enrollment may be directed to the Dean of Studies Office.
Term 1—Number Theory. The aim of the course is to understand the integers and their arithmetic properties. Topics will include divisibility,
primality, and congruences. Other topics will include Fermat’s Little Theorem, Euler’s phi-function and other number-theoretic functions,
cryptography, and Fibonacci numbers. Special emphasis will be placed on reading and writing proofs.
Prerequisite: MTH590 or MTH595.
Term 2—Art of Counting. Certain problems in mathematics—for example questions in probability and combinatorics—can essentially be
solved by creative counting. This course will develop skills in enumerative mathematics. Topics will include permutations and combinations,
partitions and generating functions, and problems in graph theory and combinatorial topology.
Prerequisite: MTH590 or MTH595.
Term 3—Calculus-based Statistics. After a brief introduction to set theory and basic principles of statistics, the course explores probability
theory, discrete, continuous, bivariate and multivariate distributions, point and interval estimations, distribution of functions of random
variables, and test of statistical hypothesis.
Prerequisite: MTH650 and MTH660.

Multivariable Calculus
MTH650A
MTH650B
(T1, T2) TWO-TERM COMMITMENT

The first term of this two-term sequence covers functions of many variables, partial differentiation, gradient vectors, and extreme values of
functions. The second term covers vector-valued functions, multiple integration, and their applications. This two-term course culminates in
the study of the integral theorems of vector calculus.
Prerequisite: MTH590 or MTH595.

Linear Algebra I
MTH660
(T3)

This course is an introduction to solving multidimensional linear equations. Topics include row reduction, Gaussian elimination, linear
transformations, matrix operations, invertible matrices, and their applications.
Prerequisite: MTH590 or MTH595.

64

Return to Table of Contents

Statistics
AP Statistics I: Data Analysis
MTH530
(T1)

This course covers the exploratory analysis of data, making use of graphical and numerical techniques to study patterns and developing
plans for data collection of valid information. The course can be the first term of a three-term sequence that prepares for the Advanced
Placement (AP) Statistics exam.
Prerequisite: MTH350 or permission of the department.

Topics in Data Analysis and Applied Statistics
MTH532
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

Statistics for Social Justice—This course will cover MTH530 topics with an emphasis on exploring how our worldview is influenced by data.
Students will research issues of equity and social justice of their choosing. The course can be the first term of a three-term sequence that
prepares for the Advanced Placement (AP) Statistics exam.
Prerequisite: MTH350 or permission of the department.

AP Statistics II: Inference
MTH535A
MTH535B
(T2, T3) TWO-TERM COMMITMENT

A continuation of either MTH530 or MTH532, finishing the syllabus for the Advanced Placement examination in May. Topics include probability as the tool for producing models, random variables, independence, normal distribution, simulation, sampling, statistical inference,
confidence intervals, and tests of significance.
Prerequisite: A grade of 3 or higher in MTH530 or MTH532.

Project-Based Statistics
MTH539A (may be taken as a Math or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is MTH539A)
MTH539B (may be taken as a Math or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is MTH539B)
MTH539C (may be taken as a Math or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is MTH539C)
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

One credit assigned each term in Mathematics or Interdisciplinary. This is a community-based learning statistics course that will enable
students to implement learned knowledge to work with communities. This curriculum-driven project contains a civic responsibility component, which ties in with the school’s major core values. Students will apply their knowledge immediately and beneficially as they “bring numbers to life” in collaboration with the PA community and local nonprofit organizations. For instance, students potentially would be able to
collect, organize, interpret, analyze, and project data to help the Admissions Office, Summer Programs Office, Dining Services, Brace Center
for Gender Studies, College Counseling Office, Archives and Special Collections, and other departments of interest at PA. Similarly, students
can assist worthy causes in the wider community, working with those entities to tell stories with numbers. Please note the three-term commitment. Students should expect that petitions to drop MTH539 after one or two terms will be denied.
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed MTH350 or with permission of the department.

Computer Science
Computer science courses at Andover freely explore a range of content topics from across the discipline. The curriculum consists of a system
of four course ranges organized by the development of a student’s skills rather than their content knowledge. Instructors work with their
classes to push students along important technical and humanistic skills, such as collaboration, experimental design, computer programming, questioning impact, and systems thinking, among others. The four course ranges have a focus on introductory, intermediate, and
advanced competency along these skill sets, followed by an independent research course.
Advancement through the computer science curriculum proceeds as follows.
• All students are eligible to take introductory computer science courses (numbered 400–449); these courses have no prerequisites.
• After taking at least one introductory course, students are eligible to enroll in intermediate computer science courses (numbered
450–499). Note that, due to the varied topics of both introductory and intermediate computer science courses, students are able and
encouraged to take more than one term of either.
• After taking at least three terms of computer science courses (introductory or intermediate), students are eligible to enroll in advanced
computer science courses (numbered 550–599).
• Students who have taken at least one advanced computer science course are eligible to enroll in CSC600: Computer Science Research and
Development.
Note that there is no placement test for computer science.

65

Return to Table of Contents

Introductory Courses CSC400–CSC449
At a student’s ﬁrst stage of development as a computer scientist, eﬀort is placed on exploring the selected topic in a manner that exposes students to pivotal practices in the technical ﬁelds, including human communication, research and design, working with code, asking questions,
and working with systems. Students will spend much of their time working on projects or other technical assignments, as well as writing,
discussing, and other forms of learning and knowing. Note that not all courses in this range are available in every school year.
This course range assumes no previous programming or computer science knowledge and is open to all students. The course material is
diﬀerentiated to enable students with previous experience to similarly feel challenged and grow as computer scientists.

Programming in Python
CSC401
(T1, T2, T3)

This course consists of an introduction to computational thinking primarily through the exploration of the Python programming language.
Students will design and code their own programming projects. The course may include additional applications such as programming
robots, introductory data analysis, game development, or other topics.

Web Development
CSC402
(T2)

This course introduces students to building web pages in the languages of HTML and CSS, and also to programming in Javascript, the most
standard language for oﬀering dynamic behavior on the web. Students explore the tools needed for deploying and managing their own websites and get a preview of other aspects of programming for the web, such as databases, server-side systems, and web frameworks.

Discrete Mathematics
CSC403
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

This course introduces students to topics in computer science by way of studying the mathematics of discrete (ﬁnite or countable) objects in
mathematics. Mathematical topics might include sets, graphs, combinatorics, logic, or groups. There will be a focus on both mathematical
and computational thinking.

Robotics
CSC411
(T1, T2, T3)

This course is a hands-on, project-based course where students will use the engineering process to engage in science-driven decision making
and review physical concepts involved in the design and construction of a robot. Students will create robots capable of complex behaviors
while exploring diﬀerent aspects of robot design and how they come together in the creation of a robot, including ethical and cultural elements surrounding the use of artiﬁcial intelligence.

Game Development
CSC412
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

This course explores the principles of an engaging game, such as gameplay mechanics, artiﬁcial intelligence, and user experience. Through
the creation of their own games, students will investigate the use of graphics, animation, sound, and collision detection, and gain a solid
understanding of the basics of game design and development.

Digital Media Computing
CSC413
(T3)

This course provides an introduction to computational thinking through the creation and manipulation of digital sounds and images.
Students will learn how media ﬁles are stored on a computer system and use this knowledge to create projects centered around digital
media. Topics could include compression, generative art and music, ﬁltering, and data encoding.

Intermediate Courses CSC450–CSC499
A continuation of a student’s journey into the world of computer science. Note that not all courses in this range are available in every school
year. Signiﬁcant emphasis will be placed on branching out as a developer to learn new platforms, languages, or tools. Students will begin to
contribute to applications beyond the classroom and will take on larger projects consisting of complex interacting systems.

66

Return to Table of Contents

Having come from introductory computer science courses, students will have experienced a variety of content topics, and as such there will
not be any expectations of previous content knowledge in the stated topic. Students should expect to apply their previous computer science
experience in new ways to discover their universality.
Prerequisite: Any Phillips Academy computer science course.

Object-Oriented Programming in Java
CSC451
(T1, T2)

This course explores everything that is needed to write object-oriented code using the Java programming language. Topics include Java
syntax and style, algorithms, introductory data structures, classes and inheritance, interfaces, searching and sorting, recursion, and objectoriented software engineering practices for the design and implementation of larger programs.

iOS App Development
CSC452
(T2)

This course covers algorithms, object-oriented and functional programming, and data structures, with a view toward applications in iOS app
development in the Swift programming language. The course will focus signiﬁcantly on projects and will also include students exploring the
ethical implications of their development decisions.

Programming Language Paradigms
CSC453
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

This course is an exploration of some of the fundamental programming language paradigms including functional, imperative, and logical.
Students will learn the theoretical and practical considerations of each paradigm through project work and experiments in various languages
(e.g., Haskell, C, Prolog) to discover the strengths and weaknesses of each. The languages, paradigms, and project directions will be studentinterest driven.

Computer Organization and Hardware
CSC454
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

This course is an introduction to the organization and design of computer systems. Students will invent and explore the essential hardware
and software components of computational devices. Topics include digital logic, circuit design, memory architectures and hierarchies, and
assembly language(s). Work in this course will be largely hands-on with microcontroller programming and circuit fabrication through
project work.

Scientific Computing
CSC461
(T1, T3)

This course draws on many disciplines to explore using computers to understand natural systems and solve scientiﬁc problems. Through
classroom and project work, students will be exposed to a variety of techniques which could include data analysis, visualization, simulation,
and numerical analysis. Students will have opportunities to apply the skills they learn to subject areas of their choosing, drawing from and
expanding upon their own scientiﬁc knowledge and interests.

Mathematical Modeling and Probabilistic Programming
CSC462
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

This course explores concepts in probability theory and statistical computing for the purposes of creating mathematical models to best
approximate a real-life situation. Applications could include population dynamics, resource distribution, closed system modeling and prediction, and statistical analysis, among others. Much of the course time will be allocated to student-devised projects.

Cryptography
CSC471
(T1, T3)

This course focuses on computing securely when in the presence of a potential adversary. Topics include encryption and decryption, authentication, data integrity, and other technical topics alongside the legal, ethical, and societal considerations necessary for a more complete
understanding of the ﬁeld.

Advanced Courses CSC550–CSC599
An advanced exploration of computer science. Students should expect to be challenged to become knowledge experts in the content topic
and practitioners of industry-standard skills. Students will be expected to ﬁnd ways to apply their technical work to make positive, eﬀective
change in the world. Note that not all courses in this range are available in every school year.

67

Return to Table of Contents

Having come from CSC300 and CSC400, students will have experienced a variety of content topics, and as such there will not be any expectations of previous content knowledge in the stated topic. Students should expect to apply their previous computer science experience in new
ways to discover their universality.
Prerequisite: Three terms of computer science courses at Phillips Academy.

Data Structures and Algorithms
CSC551
(T2)

In this course, students will work in a language of their choosing to study, build, test, analyze, and apply data structures such as stacks,
queues, linked lists, recursion, binary trees, heaps, hash maps, and graphs, including formulating appropriate algorithms to support their
data. This will necessitate the development of software engineering skills potentially including collaborative coding, source control, and testdriven development.

Information Theory
CSC552
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

In a ﬁeld-deﬁning 1948 paper, Claude Shannon wrote, “The fundamental problem of communication is that of reproducing at one point,
either exactly or approximately, a message selected at another point.” In developing the core concepts of Information and Entropy, among
others, the ﬁeld of Information Theory was born in this singular moment. This course will begin with probability theory and will involve
mathematical and computer modeling as well as signiﬁcant inquiry-based learning due to far-reaching applications and connections to
other disciplines. Students will also study the ethical impacts of the ﬁeld.

Machine Learning
CSC561
(T1)

Machine Learning is the process by which computers train themselves to make predictions and ultimately decisions. It is a subﬁeld of
artiﬁcial intelligence which plants its roots in computer science, mathematics, and statistics. We will primarily be using the Python programming language to produce predictive models from datasets.

Data Visualization
CSC562
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

In this course, students will learn all the tools needed to create powerful, interactive data visualizations. Topics include data collection,
cleaning, processing, and presentation, as well as user experience design and ethical considerations in the data process. This class will be
heavily project-based and will focus on “storytelling” with data.

Autonomous Systems
CSC571
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

This course is a hands-on, project-driven introduction to the design and control of autonomous systems. Students will plan and build
cyber-physical and autonomous systems in self-selected domains. Their project work will drive explorations of necessary robotics, artiﬁcial
intelligence, and control engineering subject matter to achieve their goals. Woven throughout this work, the students will explore the ethical
and societal implications of these systems.

The Open-Source Movement
CSC572
(T3)

Throughout the entirety of the development of computers and software, a group of like-minded individuals have held ﬁrm to the notion
that the software they write should be accessible to all. This practice allows developers to both learn from and include other’s source code in
their own, as well as empower individuals to contribute to projects that would otherwise require them to work for the controlling company.
This course will focus on both the history and the practice of open-source software development. Students will learn the Git version control
system and use the GitHub platform extensively to become the creator and maintainer of their own open-source software library, as well as
work collaboratively to contribute to their classmates’ libraries and those in the greater software development community.

Applied Term Project in Computer Science
CSC573
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

In this course, students will work as a single group to complete a singular term-long project. The project will be selected by the teacher
before the start of the course, and students should expect to be tasked with various aspects of the group’s work while simultaneously charting
a course for furthering their own learning in the relevant content topics. It is likely that the work will encompass diﬀerent tasks for diﬀerent
students including for example design, infrastructure, content creation, and communications.

68

Return to Table of Contents

Independent Research
Computer Science Research and Development
CSC600
(T3)

This course serves as an opportunity for students to explore their passion for the subject of computer science through research in the ﬁeld
and/or development of their own software projects. After learning the core tools and methodologies that are used in professional software
development and research, students will apply them to a project of their own creation. This will include a chance to grow in many areas
related to the profession in addition to the software creation process, such as maintaining open-source software, self-directed learning, presenting on one’s work and related topics, collaboratively developing and testing a codebase, and analyzing and critiquing the work of others.
Students should expect to spend a signiﬁcant amount of time reading articles from scientiﬁc journals, understanding others’ code and documentation, and/or performing market analysis. Students will regularly discuss the status of their project with classmates and present both
on their work and on more general computer science topics learned for and leveraged in their projects. Some student work may be submitted
for publication in a scientiﬁc journal or presentation at conferences.
Prerequisite: One advanced computer science course (numbered 550–599).

69

Return to Table of Contents

MUS I C
Diploma Requirements in Music
• Entering Juniors must earn no fewer than a total of four credits in art, music, and theatre and dance, with at least one credit each in art
and music. Most students who enter as Juniors complete one credit in music and one credit in art by the end of their junior year.
• New Lowers must earn no fewer than three credits in art, music, and theatre and dance, with at least one credit each in art and music.
• New Uppers must take at least one term in either art or music.
• New Seniors have no diploma requirement in music but are encouraged to take at least one term of art, music, or theatre.

Music Placements
All entering students must complete the online music placement questionnaire to determine the level at which they will enter the music curriculum. Ninth- and 10th-graders will be placed at the 225, 235, or 4xx level.
• Students who matriculated as Juniors and Lowers should take their first music course by the end of lower year, which qualifies them for
any 300-level Intermediate Elective or for some 400- or -500-level Advanced Electives. Though uncommon, students who matriculated
as Juniors or Lowers and placed into MUS225 or MUS235 who have not taken it by the end of lower year will take a MUS3XX-level
elective during upper or senior year to fulfill their introductory music diploma requirement. Students who matriculated as Juniors or
Lowers and placed into MUS235 who have not taken it by the end of lower year may enroll in an elective during upper or senior year to
fulfill their introductory music diploma requirement.
Students who place at the 4xx level may fulfill their music diploma requirement by taking any 4xx-level elective during any term.
Note: Entering Juniors who have been placed in MUS4XX and who wish to take the entire yearlong Advanced Music Theory sequence
(400-540-550) MAY consider taking this sequence during their upper or senior year.
• Students who matriculated as Uppers may fulfill their diploma requirement in the visual and performing arts with a MUS3XX- or
MUS4XX-level elective according to their placement.
• Entering Seniors have no diploma requirement in music or art but should complete the music placement test if they wish to take a music
course.
The course into which each student is placed serves as the prerequisite for all electives. Exceptions are noted in the descriptions below.

Introductory Courses
The following two courses contribute toward satisfying the diploma requirement in music.

The Nature of Music A
MUS225
(T1, T2, T3)

Open to Juniors and Lowers only. This course offers a basic introduction to music literature, theory, performance, and composition. Music
from various cultures and historical periods is examined in an attempt to increase student awareness of the musical languages and practices.
Students compose several original compositions, and they also receive instruction on musical instruments. No previous experience in music
is required.

The Nature of Music B
MUS235
(T1, T2, T3)

Open to Juniors and Lowers only. This course is designed for students who have had some experience reading music and playing an instrument. As a more advanced version of MUS225, it will include more extensive experiences in composition. Study of some core works of music
literature from a variety of cultures will help develop listening skills, and there will be opportunities for live music-making in class.

Intermediate Electives
Jazz History
MUS310
(T2)

This course begins by examining jazz’s mixture of African and European traditions and the subsequent pre-jazz styles of spiritual, blues,
and ragtime. It then proceeds with a study of 20th-century jazz styles, beginning with New Orleans and culminating with the multifaceted
creations of today’s artists. Along the way the course pays tribute to the work of some of jazz’s most influential innovators, including Louis
Armstrong, Duke Ellington, Count Basie, Billie Holiday, Charlie Parker, and Miles Davis. Original recordings, photographs, and videos are
used extensively throughout the term. (Mr. Cirelli)

70

Return to Table of Contents

Icons of American Popular Music
MUS320
(T3)

In this course, students will engage in a personal exploration of some of the most iconic popular music of the 20th century. Students will
develop a set of criteria to answer the questions: What makes it good, and why? Developing context through historical research, students
will consider how each musician made an impact on the national and global community and explore how their music continues to influence
popular music written today. (Mr. Daniels)
Prerequisite: If MUS225, -235 placement, fulfillment of diploma requirement.

Survey of Music History
MUS330
(T1, T3)

A one-term survey of Western music history. The course progresses chronologically from classical antiquity to the music of today, exploring
along the way the religious, social, historical, and human issues surrounding music and its composition. Students who took a previous version of MUS330 are not eligible for this course. (Mr. Lorenço)

Music Technology
MUS360 (Course runs concurrently with MUS460)
(T2, T3)
This Music Technology course and MUS460 are both hands-on courses that gives students the opportunity to experience how sound and
technology intertwine to create the magic of music. Students will spend time learning how to operate audio software to engineer and produce great sounding music; how to properly record common instruments with a variety of microphone techniques; the technologies behind
sound synthesis and architectural acoustics; and how to design sound effects. Students placed in the 460-level (based on instructor approval
or a 4xx level placement) will work alongside students in MUS360. Students in the advanced course will have separate music production
projects that require musical proficiency, a critical ear, and abstract creativity.

Music for Social Justice: The Power of Song
MUS380
(T2)

Whether it’s rap/hip hop, rock, country-western or any of the popular music forms, music is an apparatus that can deliver a powerful message in an extremely impactful way. In 1939, Billie Holiday made famous a song called “Strange Fruit,” describing the lynching of Black
Americans as “strange fruit hangin’ from the poplar tree.” Time later designated it the “song of the century.” In 1988, the hip hop band
N.W.A. released F**k Tha Police (1988). It was one of the most controversial of the decade, yet its message was not fully realized until the
murder of George Floyd on May 25th, 2020.
This class will take a broad survey of some of the most impactful protest songs of the century. Together, we will compile a list of some of the
most powerful messages delivered by song. We will switch between looking through the lens of musician/artist as entertainer and as activist.
The format this course will take a historical approach to the 20th century timeline. (Mr. Daniels)
Prerequisite: If MUS225, -235 placement, fulfillment of diploma requirement.

American Musical Theatre
MUS390
(NOT OFFERED IN 2024–2025)

Open to any student (no prerequisites). Musical Theatre is an interdisciplinary and experiential class that will explore both the history and
performance elements of American Musical Theatre. Beginning with the 1920s and culminating with present day, students will explore the
historical context of a significant musical in a particular decade each week. Students also will perform a number from that musical each
week, challenging themselves in the discipline of performance. Over the course of the term, students will gain knowledge of American history through the lens of the performing arts and gain experience in performing in the three elements of musical theatre (song, dance, and
spoken word). Public performances will occur throughout the term, including a final project. (Dr. Siegfried)

Advanced Electives
For students placing at the 4xx level, the following courses satisfy the diploma requirement in music.

Introduction to Theory and Composition
MUS400
(T1)

This course is designed to give students a vocabulary to further understand and describe the music they will encounter. After beginning the
year learning hand-written musical notation, the study of scales, intervals, tonality, harmony, melodic organization, voice leading in two
parts, and harmonic dictation ensues. After this study is complete, students will be in a position to knowledgeably describe every aspect
of a typical piece of music that they may come across. Ear-training skills are developed through dictation and sight singing. Those taking
this course in the fall are encouraged to combine it with MUS540 and MUS550 to form a three-term Advanced Music Theory sequence.
Students will begin composing near the end of the term, but it should be noted that most compositional activity will occur in MUS540
and MUS550.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of a music course at the 200 level or above, or placement at the MUS4XX level.

71

Return to Table of Contents

Music Theory for Improvisation
MUS401
(T1)

Musicians of today play in a variety of genres and traditions where improvisation is a major expressive component of the music. Whether in
jazz, blues, R&B, Indian Classical Music or any number of other traditions, improvisation is most effective (and most fun!) when the player
understands the structural content of the music. Students in this course will work toward fluency in various elements of improvisational
music theory, including chord structures and their symbols, scales, intervals, song forms and rhythmic structures. They will then apply that
knowledge in real time while improvising in various styles. This course is for students who want to develop improvisational skills that can be
applied in a variety of performance traditions. (Mr. Cirelli)
Prerequisite: Successful completion of a music course at the 200 level or above, or placement at the MUS4XX level.

Your Musical Brain
MUS410
(T2, T3)

What playlists do you create to accompany you through the parts of your day? How does the music we choose shape the personal and communal tapestry of our daily lives? The Musical Brain explores why music matters so much to us as individuals and as a species. Through
reading assignments, listening assignments, and classroom activities we’ll explore the rapidly evolving field of inquiry and research in
music perception and cognition. Topics will include the science of sound, the biological origins of music, relationships between music and
language, and the sources of music’s emotional impact. (Dr. Aureden)
Prerequisite: Successful completion of a music course at the 200 level or above, or placement at the MUS4XX level.

Advanced Music Technology
MUS460 (Course runs concurrently with MUS360)
(T2, T3)
This Advanced Music Technology course and MUS360 are both hands-on courses that gives students the opportunity to experience how
sound and technology intertwine to create the magic of music. Students will spend time learning how to operate audio software to engineer
and produce great sounding music; how to properly record common instruments with a variety of microphone techniques; the technologies
behind sound synthesis and architectural acoustics; and how to design sound effects. Students placed in the -460-level (based on instructor approval or a 4xx level placement) will work alongside students in MUS360. Students in the advanced course will have separate music
production projects that require musical proficiency, a critical ear, and abstract creativity.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of a music course at the 200 level, or placement at the MUS4XX level.

Film Scoring: Influencing Audiences Through Sound and Silence
MUS470
(T3)

In this course, students will study film music primarily through compositional exercises, as well as analysis of films from various genres and
time periods. The course will begin with an introduction to a wide variety of compositional styles and techniques employed throughout the
history of film, including changes resulting from increased technological resources throughout the 20th century. Students will then compose
music for film scenes from different genres, such as drama, horror, romance, and action/adventure. Though this course will primarily focus
on music from the 20th century to the present, students also will learn about how certain composers connected music to visual images in
classical concert music prior to 1900. (Ms. Landolt)
Prerequisite: Successful completion of a music course at the 200 level or above, or placement at the MUS4XX level.

Songwriting Workshop
MUS480
(T2)

Popular music plays an important role in our modern culture: it can provide an escape from our daily lives and influence our thoughts and
actions. MUS480 will begin by exploring popular songs from artists such as Ed Sheeran, Taylor Swift, John Legend, Jay-Z, as well as those of
other artists from Motown to the present day. We will study songs from a variety of genres—including jazz, blues, rock, R&B, folk, and country western—as a way of building a foundational understanding of popular music. In addition to frequent songwriting exercises, students
will create three original songs in the genre of their choice with particular focus on the musical attributes needed to support both the genre
and the specific topic of each song. You need not be a performer to take this class, however students enrolled in MUS480 will be offered an
opportunity to perform their original songs at our annual “Sunset Coffee House.” (Ms. Barnes)
Prerequisite: Successful completion of a music course at the 200 level or above, or placement at the MUS4XX level.

Intermediate Theory and Composition
MUS540
(T2)

Continuing from where MUS400 leaves off, this course begins the students’ hands-on compositional development. Small pieces are
composed almost nightly as students now begin to demonstrate what they previously learned to recognize and describe. Also in this term,
students will compose several larger pieces that will be written for and recorded by classmates. As the term progresses, the chords of Western
music are incorporated into their musical vocabulary one by one. Further study in sight singing and ear training help to continue that development. In most years, this term includes a field trip to see the Boston Symphony Orchestra in concert.
Prerequisite: MUS400 or permission of the instructor.

72

Return to Table of Contents

Advanced Theory and Composition
MUS550
(T3)

Completing the music theory sequence, the focus for the beginning of this term is on preparation for the AP exam in May. Students study
non-dominant seventh chords, applied dominant seventh chords, and musical form before a week of AP prep. After the AP exam, a larger
project is decided upon. Past projects have included studying Chopin’s piano preludes, examining poetic meaning in Schubert’s songs, and
composing a 3–5 minute work.
Prerequisite: MUS540 or permission of the instructor.

Advanced Music Production
MUS560
(T3)

This course is intended to provide students with the full hands-on experience of music production. Students will choose between an original
composition or a cover of a favorite song and will produce the work from start to finish. Each week will focus on advanced production, songwriting, and acoustic techniques for all instrument families. Finally, student’s will also learn how to master songs in preparation for release
on various mediums. Projects may be selected for release on MusicAtAndover!
Prerequisite: MUS360 or permission of instructor.

Performance Electives
Fidelio Society
MUS901
(T1, T2, T3)

Fidelio Society is Andover’s auditioned mixed chamber choir. Membership in Fidelio is by audition at the beginning of Term 1 (fall) and is
conditional upon continued good standing in Chorus. Students in Fidelio commit to three nights of rehearsal per week (Monday, Tuesday,
and Thursday evenings) and perform on numerous occasions throughout the year, including choral concerts, special events on campus,
residencies and workshops with visiting artists, and off campus. Repertoire includes music of all types, early and modern, sacred and secular.
Students participating in Fidelio can opt to take it for credit any term of the school year. A complete list of requirements can be found in the
music office or by contacting the ensemble director. (Dr. Siegfried)
Prerequisite: Permission of Dr. Siegfried and the department chair.

Chamber Music Performance Seminar
MUS910
(T3)

This summary course affords students an opportunity to apply their theoretical knowledge to practical music making through the analysis and performance of chamber music. The process of performance and its attending anxieties also will be studied through readings and
exercises. Class work consists of sight reading, performing, coaching, and discussing chamber works and performance issues. Homework
consists of individual practice, group rehearsal, and readings from books about performance. Students are expected to be advanced instrumentalists and they generally will have taken at least MUS400. Because different literature is studied each term, this course may be taken
more than once. (Ms. Barnes)
Prerequisite: Permission of Ms. Barnes and the department chair.

Applied Music
All students who are interested in joining a vocal or instrumental performance ensemble are encouraged to do so. There are ensembles at
every level of experience. Students in ensembles are required to commit to having two nights per week with rehearsals. Rarely, ensembles
may be joined midyear (typically at the beginning of a term) with permission of the ensemble director, but we encourage students to consider ensemble participation to be a yearlong commitment.
Participation in a music ensemble is usually extracurricular, with no academic credit granted. The only exception is for students selected to
participate in Fidelio, who may choose to receive academic credit for their participation (course description below). Please note that Fidelio
for credit cannot be counted toward the diploma requirement in the arts.

Non-Credit Music Ensembles
The following is a list of non-credit music ensembles. Please contact the Department of Music if you are interested in participating in one of
these ensembles.
Academy Symphony Orchestra (85 members): The ASO includes all string players and select winds, brass, and percussion players determined by audition. All ASO string players also are placed, through an audition process, into one of two smaller chamber orchestras.
Academy Chamber Orchestra (25+ members): “Chamber Orchestra” is the more advanced of the two string ensembles. Members of this
ensemble can expect extensive practice requirements outside of scheduled rehearsals to meet the demands of the repertoire. Select wind
players join this ensemble for some pieces.
Amadeus String Orchestra (25+ members): “Amadeus” is the intermediate string ensemble. Members of this ensemble can expect to hone
their skills in expressive ensemble-playing through rehearsals combining repertoire preparation and sight reading.

73

Return to Table of Contents

Academy Chorus (65 members): The Academy’s major singing group, the Academy Chorus is comprised of mixed voices and performs a
variety of choral works, both sacred and secular. Membership in the Academy Chorus is open to all students, regardless of previous choral
experience.
Fidelio (16–20 members): This small, all-gender a cappella chamber choir group performs on numerous occasions throughout the year.
Fidelio repertoire includes music of all types—early and modern, sacred and secular. Membership is determined by audition and is conditional upon good standing in chorus. Fidelio may be taken for credit, but it is not required.
Gospel Choir (membership open to all students): Gospel Choir is organized as a club and rehearses for an hour early in the evening. The
choir performs at ecumenical chapel services and special celebrations.
Concert Band (65 members): Membership is open to all students playing wind, brass, and percussion instruments. All types of music for
wind ensemble are performed, including marches, classical, popular, and show music.
Jazz Band (20 members): Membership in Jazz Band is determined by audition at the beginning of each school year. Jazz Band utilizes a
typical Big Band format and performs repertoire ranging from Count Basie and Duke Ellington to contemporary Latin jazz and jazz/rock
fusion compositions. Membership is conditional upon continued good standing in the Concert Band.
Handbell Choir (12–15 members): This ensemble rehearses weekly in the evening and performs during special occasions throughout the
year.

Private Instrument and Voice Lessons
MUS909
(T1, T2, T3) (NON-CREDIT)

Weekly non-credit lessons are available on all band and orchestral instruments and on the piano (classical and jazz), organ, harpsichord,
harp, guitar (classical, rock, and jazz), ukulele, bagpipes, and voice. Students can also take private lessons in Alexander Technique, composition, conducting, or digital music composition/production.
There is an additional fee for private lessons. Financial aid is available for some students; please contact the financial aid office to see if you
are eligible.
At the beginning of each term (after the music lesson drop deadline, which is posted in Graves Hall), students will be charged for
8 lessons. Please inquire with the music department for more detailed information about attendance expectations for weekly private music
lessons.
Term 1—Fall: 8 lessons
Term 2—Winter: 8 lessons
Term 3—Spring: 8 lessons

74

Return to Table of Contents

NATURAL SCI ENCES
To participate fully in society, citizens require knowledge of scientific issues and an understanding of how those issues relate to their lives.
People who are broadly educated and who also have special expertise in the sciences are vital to the well-being of our planet and its inhabitants. The science program is focused around four major goals.
In fulfilling the science requirement, Phillips Academy students should demonstrate:
1. They can do science. A student should pose testable questions and formulate hypotheses; design and conduct experiments; organize,
analyze, and interpret results and information; conceptualize and reason through problems, both qualitatively and quantitatively; and
articulate and present clearly and accurately ideas, results, and analysis in an appropriately selected format.
2. They are scientifically literate. A student should think clearly and critically about major issues relating to science; gain appreciation
of and experience with the natural world; perceive the relevance of science to everyday life, including global environmental issues; and
recognize the connections and interdependence among the traditional branches of science and between science and other fields.
3. They participate comfortably and fully in an inclusive community of learners. Students and teachers should work effectively with
persons of varied backgrounds, interests, and abilities in scientific collaboration, perceive the needs of the individual, team, or community,
and work to meet those needs.
4. They accept responsibility for the process of personal education. A student should play an active role in discussions, experiments, and
decisions; ask questions, question answers, and maintain an independence of thought while engaged in learning; recognize that school is
a piece of the continuum of lifelong learning, for science is a rapidly evolving field; and, hence, acquire skills that will allow one to learn
beyond the halls of academia.
The diploma requirement in science is two three-term science courses. A strong program will include some experience in biology, chemistry, and physics. Most four-year students take biology or physics, and most Juniors take BIO100 or PHY100 as their introductory science
course. A small number of four-year students will take chemistry in 9th grade, followed by chemistry in 10th grade. However, individual
interests, backgrounds, and abilities may indicate other appropriate sequences.
The division of natural sciences offers a variety of introductory and advanced courses, yearlong and term-contained in biology, chemistry,
physics, and interdisciplinary fields. Staffing of yearlong courses is the first priority and students who wish to take a full year of science can
be so guaranteed only by taking a yearlong course. Enrollment in term-contained courses is limited and determined by seniority.
Any of the following yearlong sequences satisfy one year of the science diploma requirement. Level changes between these sequences will
generally meet the requirement as well. Any other arrangements need to be approved through the Associate Dean of Studies for Advising.
Biology 100A, 100B, 100C
Biology 501, 502, 503
Biology 581, 582, 583

Chemistry 250A, 250B, 250C
Chemistry 300A, 300B, 300C
Chemistry 550A, 550B, 550C
Chemistry 580A, 580B, 580C

Physics 100A, 100B, 100C
Physics 300A, 300B, 300C
Physics 401, 402, 403

Physics 401, 402, 403
Physics 551, 552, 553
Physics 552, 553, 554

Biology
Most four-year students take biology or physics, and most Juniors take BIO100 or PHY100 as their introductory science course. A small
number of four-year students will take chemistry in 9th grade, followed by chemistry in 10th grade. Uppers and Seniors are placed in BIO501
or BIO581 by the department chair. In general, students who have had three-terms of biology and a 6 in CHM250 (or equivalent), a 5 or
higher in CHM300 (or equivalent), or a 4 or higher in CHM500, -550, or -580 (or equivalent) will be placed in the BIO580 sequence.

Introduction to Biology
BIO100A
BIO100B
BIO100C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This course is for Juniors. BIO100 is theme-based and focused on major biological topics. Studying a core text will be supplemented with
other readings, writing assignments, and data analysis and interpretation. Students will learn a variety of study skills and will have an
introduction to library research tools. Laboratory experiments and fieldwork are designed to acquaint students with fundamental biological
principles and to build skills in the methods and techniques used to elucidate those principles.

Animal Ecology: East Africa
BIO411
(T3)

This course focuses on the animals of East Africa—think lions and rhinos but also weaverbirds and safari ants—and how they interact
with their environment. Students will do deep dives into a variety of topics in a way that leverages both student areas of interest as well as
instructor expertise. Possible topics include behavioral ecology of olive baboons, elephants as ecosystem engineers, the ecology of the Great
Migration, and the interplay of vector-borne diseases, climate change, and conservation. Students will gain a sense of “place” by focusing on
animal ecological systems in a specific region of the world and will utilize a variety of modalities, including readings, independent research,
film, and classroom discussions to enhance their understanding and engagement with the animal systems explored.

75

Return to Table of Contents

Animal Behavior
BIO420
(T1)

Open to Uppers and Seniors. This course is a survey of major topics in animal behavior, including foraging, territoriality, mating strategies
and systems, parental care, sociality, and cognition, and is taught through the lens of evolution. Students will participate in hands-on simulations of animal decision-making as well as investigate the behavior of model animals in and outside the classroom.

Human Anatomy, Physiology, and Global Health
BIO455
(T2)

In this course, we will explore the organ systems of the human body, using hands-on laboratory experiences (including dissections), case studies, and readings to understand how our bodies maintain homeostasis and perform the many daily functions that keep us operating at our
best. We will also investigate factors that lead to disease conditions in order to better understand the functioning of the systems we discuss.
Prerequisite: BIO100 (or similar course at a previous high school) and/or BIO501 or permission of the instructor and the department chair
is required to take this course. This course may not be taken if you have taken or will be taking BIO582.

Topics in Advanced Biology I
BIO501
(T1)

Open to Uppers and Seniors. This is the first term of a three-term sequence covering a range of advanced topics in biology. Term 1 introduces
students to an evolutionary and structure-fits-function framework that will be revisited throughout the year. Students develop an understanding of ecosystems in light of global ecologic concerns and with an eye toward sustainable engagement with our natural resources. Later,
the study of plants provides a scaffold in which to further investigate ecological relationships as well as cellular structure, metabolism, and
transport. Students will utilize exploration of data sets, primary literature, scientific inquiry, and written scientific communication through
class work and laboratory investigations.
Prerequisite: One yearlong course in chemistry with an average grade of 4 or better. Lowers who received an average grade of 3 or below in
chemistry should enroll in a physics course upper year and advanced biology their senior year. Students who received an average grade of
6 in CHM250, a 5 or 6 in CHM300, or a grade of 4 or higher in CHM501, -502, 503, 550 or CHM580 should take BIO581 instead. Final
decisions about placement in BIO581 will be made by the department chair.
Note the three-term sequence (BIO501, -502, -503)

Topics in Advanced Biology II
BIO502
(T2)

In Term 2 of this three-term sequence, coursework focuses primarily on cellular mechanics, including the biochemistry of organic molecules,
cellular structure and function, energy metabolism, cell reproduction, and molecular genetics. Students build on foundational skills from
the fall to expand facility with laboratory experimentation, data analysis, and scientific communication through inquiry-based studies. Essay
composition offers students the opportunity to engage deeply with primary literature and integrate current scientific knowledge into their
study of biology.
Prerequisite: Completion of BIO501 or equivalent.

Topics in Advanced Biology III
BIO503
(T3)

In Term 3 of this three-term sequence, students investigate inheritance by studying Mendelian genetics, the “modern synthesis”, and human
reproduction. Case studies enable students to interrogate the nature of human identity, including the biology of race and pressures shaping
modern human populations. Experimental work will expand on inquiry skills developed throughout fall and winter and culminate in a final
student-driven project that encourages students to synthesize course content with analytical and communication skills.
Prerequisite: Completion of BIO501 and BIO502 or their equivalent.

Cellular Biology
BIO581
(T1)

Open to Uppers and Seniors. BIO581 meets three times per week with a double period on Mondays. As such, students enrolling in BIO581
may take a maximum of four additional courses. Following a brief review of chemical principles, the course examines the major classes of
biomolecules and how they are synthesized and degraded in the cell, with emphasis on reactions associated with energy conversion pathways
such as respiration and photosynthesis. Enzyme function is considered both in terms of mechanisms of action and with regard to kinetics. The
relationship between structure and function at the molecular level is emphasized in studies of molecular genetics and the control of genetic
expression. Biotechnology is introduced through the laboratory. Not open to those who have completed BIO501, BIO502, and BIO503.
Prerequisite: A grade of 6 in CHM250, a 5 or higher in CHM300, or a 4 or higher in CHM550 or -580. The department chair will make
final decisions about placement of students in BIO501 or BIO581.

76

Return to Table of Contents

Human Anatomy and Physiology
BIO582
(T2)

A continuation of BIO581, BIO582 meets three times per week with a double period on Mondays. This course includes an in-depth consideration of some of the major systems of the human body. Emphasis is placed on the relationship between structure and function at the cellular,
tissue, organ, and organ system levels. Permission of the department chair is required for those who have completed BIO501, BIO502, and
BIO503. Students enrolling in BIO582 may take a maximum of four additional courses.
Prerequisite: BIO581 or permission of the department chair.

Evolution and Ecology
BIO583
(T3)

BIO583 meets three times per week with a double period on Mondays. Included is significant time in the laboratory or in the field.
Sustainability and change are the central themes through which we will consider evolution and ecology. Evolution is a major unifying theme
in biology, and the mechanism of natural selection serves as a foundation for examining ecosystems and relationships between populations,
including humans. A short library research paper will be required. Not open to those who have completed BIO501, BIO502, and BIO503.
Students enrolling in BIO583 may take a maximum of four additional courses.
Prerequisite: BIO581 or permission of the instructor and the department chair.

Independent Laboratory Research in Biology
BIO600A
BIO600B
(T1, T2) TWO-TERM COMMITMENT; BIO600A AND BIO600B CAN BE TAKEN T1 & T2 OR T2 & T3

This elective is open to Seniors. BIO600A meets three times a week with a double period on Mondays, requiring extensive work both in and
out of the laboratory. BIO600B meets for two periods for six class periods a week, requiring extensive work both in and out of the laboratory.
As such, students enrolling in BIO600 may take a maximum of four additional courses. Six-course loads will not be awarded to students
enrolling in BIO600, unless the sixth course is a 900-level music course.
Students will learn laboratory techniques through work with model organisms and experimental systems such as bacteria, mammalian cell
culture, Caenorhabditis elegans, and Daphnia pulex. After learning a core of methodologies that are used in professional labs, students will
apply them to focused research projects, oftentimes performed in collaboration with professional scientists at other institutions. As they
develop their project proposals, students will spend a significant amount of time reading articles from scientific journals and learning to
craft well-designed experiments. Students will be asked to keep a lab journal and to write and present a scientific paper.
Prerequisite: Completion of one year of chemistry and one year of 500-level biology, with grades of 4 or above.

Chemistry
The chemistry department offers two yearlong introductory courses in chemistry, each of which fulfills part of the diploma requirement for a
laboratory science. Placement in CHM250 and CHM300 series is generally based on concurrent mathematics placement.

Introduction to Chemistry
CHM250A
CHM250B
CHM250C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

An introduction to the chemical view of the material world, including atomic theory, atomic structure, chemical reactions, the nature of
solids, liquids, gases, and solutions, general equilibria, acid-base theories. Emphasis is placed on developing problem-solving skills as well as
on making connections between chemical principles and everyday life. A college-level text is used, but the pace of this course is adjusted to
ensure that students have ample opportunity to ask questions and work through problems. Laboratory work is an integral part of the course.
A 5 or above in the winter and spring term of CHM250 will prepare a student for CHM550 series.
NOTE: This course is NOT open to Juniors.

College Chemistry
CHM300A
CHM300B
CHM300C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This course is an introduction to the theoretical framework of modern chemistry, including atomic structure, chemical bonding, phase
changes, solutions, chemical reactions, thermodynamics, kinetics, general equilibria, acid-base equilibria, electrochemistry, and aspects
of inorganic chemistry. Emphasis is placed on developing problem-solving skills and understanding the experimental basis of theories. A
college-level text is used. Laboratory work is an integral part of the course.
Corequisite: Registration in at least MTH320 or above, with the exception of those students enrolled in MTH280.
Prerequisite: Grade of 4 or above in previous term of mathematics and previous algebra course. Students not registered for MTH320 or
above or MTH280 but who have a 6 in their previous math class may enroll in CHM300A.
NOTE: Juniors who do not earn a 5’s on the first test in CHM300A will be switched to BIO100A immediately.

77

Return to Table of Contents

Accelerated Advanced Chemistry
CHM550A
CHM550B
CHM550C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

CHM550 is a rigorous general chemistry course that covers major topics from the AP (Advanced Placement) syllabus, where laboratory work
is an integral part of the course. Because of its pace, the curriculum delves into more topics than are seen in CHM300. However, it does not
cover the breadth and depth of chemistry topics that is experienced in the two-year CHM300 to CHM580 sequence.
Prerequisites:
• This course is not open to students who have taken CHM300 or its equivalent, or to Juniors, with the exception of those Juniors enrolled
in MTH650.
• Students with no previous chemistry who are in MTH380 or above may enroll; students in MTH360 or below may only enroll with
permission of the Chemistry Department chair.
• Grade of 5 or above in the previous mathematics course during the winter and spring term.

Advanced College Chemistry
CHM580A
CHM580B
CHM580C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

CHM580 is a rigorous second-year general chemistry course that covers major topics from and beyond the AP (Advanced Placement) syllabus. While the instructor provides readings to assist with review of CHM300 material, students are expected to arrive in class ready to focus
on advanced treatment of topics and laboratory investigations. A highlight of CHM580 is the investigative laboratory program, in which
students are presented with a problem to solve in the lab. Given only a list of available equipment and a few guidelines, students must design
an experiment and record all necessary observations and measurements to solve the problem.
Prerequisite: Grade of 5 or above in each term of CHM300.

Organic Chemistry
CHM610
CHM620
(T1, T2)

This course introduces many of the basic reactions and concepts students will encounter in their future studies of chemistry, biology, or medicine. Rather than covering a large number of reactions, as might happen in a second-year (full year) college organic chemistry course, this
course emphasizes an understanding of general principles of reactivity and mechanism. The classroom work is supplemented by demonstrations through which students learn some of the fundamental tools of this highly empirical science. In addition, each student gains detailed
knowledge of an area of active research related to organic chemistry. After selecting a topic of interest, each student prepares a paper and a
class seminar, using current scientific literature. (Mr. Faulk)
Prerequisite: Completion of either CHM550 with a 5 or above each term, CHM580 with a 5 or above each term, or with permission from the
department chair. CHM610 is a prerequisite for CHM620.

Laboratory Techniques in Organic Chemistry
CHM630
(T3)

This hands-on laboratory course serves to introduce and build upon advanced techniques that are commonly used in organic chemistry. The
first part of the term will focus on techniques such as chromatography, separation, distillation, and crystallization, and their background
theory. Students will also gain experience searching for and analyzing chemical research articles. The second part of the term will include
application of these techniques to chemical reactions. The term will culminate in students selecting a peer-reviewed literature procedure to
duplicate and expand upon in the lab. (Dr. Lambson)
Prerequisite: Completion of CHM620.

Interdisciplinary Science
Environmental Science: Global Climate Change
SCI410 (may be taken as a Science or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is SCI410)
(T2)

One credit assigned in Science or Interdisciplinary. This course prepares students to grasp the science behind the politics. The course
begins with an overview of climate science, including atmospheric composition, major biogeochemical cycles, principles of energy conservation and flow, the greenhouse effect, atmospheric and oceanic circulation, and natural climate variability. We then investigate recent anthropogenic climate change, examining both causes and consequences. We will primarily consider impacts on ecological systems, but also assess
impacts on public health, economics, and global justice. The second half of the course will address the response to global climate change by
investigating mitigation strategies. Students will analyze current and potential future sources of energy, both nonrenewable and renewable.
Readings will include original scientific literature, nonfiction books and essays, text excerpts, and news coverage. (Mr. Mackinson)
Prerequisite: Open to Uppers and Seniors, who have completed one year of laboratory science.

78

Return to Table of Contents

Environmental Science: Food, Agriculture, and the Future
SCI420 (may be taken as a Science or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is SCI420)
(T1)

One credit assigned in Science or Interdisciplinary. This course may be taken in addition to or independently of SCI410 and/or SCI430.
This course examines agriculture as a major driver of global environmental change and public health trends. We will explore the demands
placed on food production by population growth and a dietary transition, the chemical origins and ecological impacts of fertilizer, and the
implications of limited resources of water, land, and oil. The course will integrate fundamental environmental principles of nutrient cycling
and energy flow, provide an introduction to environmental economics and policy, and examine how agriculture affects land use, climate
change, and biodiversity. We will explore public health impacts of agriculture including food safety, antibiotic resistance, and the rise of obesity and diabetes. Finally, we will consider the future of agriculture and food. Readings will include original scientific literature, nonfiction
books and essays, text excerpts, and news coverage. Students should be prepared to undertake a term project.
Prerequisite: Open to Uppers and Seniors, who have completed one year of laboratory science.

Water and Humanity
SCI430 (may be taken as a Science or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is SCI430)
(T3)

One credit assigned in Science or Interdisciplinary. Water and Humanity examines the dynamic and tenuous relationship between water
resources and human development. Exploring water from a multidisciplinary, project-driven perspective, students will think critically about
the central role water has played and must continue to play in the viability and vitality of all civilizations, as well as the many challenges
that people face in sustaining, protecting, and gaining access to usable fresh water. Students will encounter diverse materials, use holistic
approaches, and engage in innovative project planning to consider, understand, and propose solutions to complex water issues. This course
will focus on the value of water and on the issues that water scarcity presents within the contexts of such elements as religious belief and
practice, the human-water relationship in fine art and architecture, national and imperial infrastructure, and industrial development.
Students also will think about the role of water in their own local, regional, and global communities, while researching and proposing their
own solutions to complex multidisciplinary water issues. (Mr. Mackinson)
Prerequisite: Open to Uppers and Seniors, who have completed one year of laboratory science.

Environmental Economics
SCI460 (may be taken as a History and Social Science HSS504, Science, or Interdisciplinary course;
official course number is SCI460)
(T3)

One credit assigned in Interdisciplinary, History and Social Science, or Science. This course is a case-based introduction to using
economics to look at some of the major environmental problems in the 21st century. In this topic-driven course, students will learn about
the role of market failure in environmental issues, the challenges of pricing environmental goods, and ways in which economic theory can
be used to help solve these problems. Topics such as overfishing, global warming, water pollution, and others will be covered from the angles
of science and economics. Special consideration of the unique role that social justice plays in many of the topics will be considered as well.
Students will be assessed on problem sets, essays, in-class discussions, and an individual research project. (Mr. Parker and Mr. Robinson)

Neurobiology of Learning, Memory, and Sleep
SCI465
(T1)

Open to Uppers and Seniors. Students will investigate the biological systems of learning, memory, and sleep in the human brain, first
through a cognitive neuropsychological lens and later with greater focus on the cellular neuroplasticity underlying memory consolidation. Questions guiding the course include: How have we, as a species, evolved to learn? What are the biological purposes for the various
memories we carry forth, and how can we hack our own neural networks to become better learners? We’re vulnerable when we fall asleep, so
why do we do it at all? Specifically, why do we need sleep for our brains to function properly, and what are the actual biological costs of our
sleepless nights?
Students will complete a series of papers and projects, through which they will demonstrate both their understanding of, and ability
to share, practical learning strategies within the Andover community. A central goal for the course is the development of SCIENTIFIC
LEARNERS, informed regarding the neuroscience of learning, nimble in their experimentation with new learning approaches, and willing
to engage in the periodic personal reflection necessary to assess their ever-changing habits of mind. (Dr. Marshall)

Human Origins
SCI470 (may be taken as a Science or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is SCI470)
(T2)

One credit assigned in Science or Interdisciplinary. Take a look around. Regardless of where you are, the consequence of three million
years of human evolution is evident. This interdisciplinary science course uses insights drawn from history, art, archaeology, and other disciplines to chart the human journey from hominid to the first civilizations that forecast the modern world. Human Origins includes weekly
field or laboratory work outside of the classroom; hands-on laboratory exercises emphasize use of Peabody Museum of Archaeology collections and challenge students to apply ancient techniques to solve daily problems of survival. (Dr. Wheeler)
Prerequisite: Open to Uppers and Seniors.

79

Return to Table of Contents

Natural Causes: How Climate Change Wrote History
SCI476 (may be taken as a History, Science, or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is HSS593)
(T2)

One credit assigned in History, Science, or Interdisciplinary. The impact of human activity on the behavior of the earth’s climate has
become one of the overriding concerns of the modern world, making climate change the central environmental problem of our time.
Anticipating the impact of climate change on modern civilization, however, is not an easy exercise. Past climate change can help us to understand it as a catalyst for change that humans were not aware of, and can then help us to decide the role humans have played in the current
environmental situation.
Through a series of case studies, we will investigate how civilizations have been influenced by weather and climate change. Starting with a
historical overview of broad changes in climate, students will investigate specific instances when weather has influenced the course of his­
tory. How, for example, did winter weather protect Russia from invasion by first Sweden, then Napoleonic France and Nazi Germany? We
will then expand our scope to examine the larger and longer-term influence of climate shifts on the course of regional civilizations such as
the Maya in Central America, the Tang Dynasty in China, and the Harappan/Indus Valley civilization. The third group of case studies will
examine the impact of global climate shifts on the interaction between civilizations on a continental scale. Examples could include the rise
and spread of the Mongol civilization from central Asia to Eastern Europe and eastern Asia. We will end the term by examining the possible
consequences of climate change on the future course of modern civilization. (Dr. Hagler and Ms. Doheny)
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed any term of HSS3000.

Marine Science
SCI485
(T1)

This course provides an introduction to physical, chemical, and biological oceanography through interdisciplinary investigations into
important oceanographic processes. Students will seek to understand key oceanographic phenomena such as ocean acidification, fisheries
management, and shoreline dynamics through field and lab work, computer modeling, and analysis of scientific literature. Collaborative
in nature, this course will require students to actively engage in asking scientific questions, seeking answers and solutions, communicating
their findings both orally and in writing, and applying their knowledge to novel scenarios. (Mr. Mackinson)
Prerequisite: Open to Uppers and Seniors who have completed one yearlong course in chemistry.

Physics
Introduction to Physics
PHY100A
PHY100B
PHY100C
(T1, T2, T3)

A yearlong laboratory science course exclusively for 9th-graders (Juniors) who enter the Academy in MTH225. In the fall we focus on kinematics (describing motions using mathematics) and introduce the idea of forces using Newton’s Laws of Motion. In the winter we expand
our study of forces to include momentum and collisions, then consider energy. In the spring we study oscillations and waves, including
sound and light. We then apply our understanding of how light and matter interact to consider the greenhouse effect and global climate
change. Inquiry-based laboratory exercises throughout the year help students gain deeper insight into the nature of science generally and
build quantitative skills that complement their work in our math curriculum.

Introduction to Physics
PHY300A
PHY300B
PHY300C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This course is open to Uppers and Seniors. Lowers who have completed a year of high school chemistry may also enroll. Students explore how
scientists view the world by engaging in scientific methods. We observe and study physical phenomena in the laboratory and in the world
around us. We develop quantitative problem-solving skills as we study basic topics in mechanics, electricity, and magnetism. After completing
this course, students may take PHY401 or PHY551 if they meet the math prerequisite.

College Physics I
PHY401
(T1)

The first term of this non-calculus physics course covers classical mechanics. Laboratory work is integral to the course. In general, completion of a chemistry sequence is not a prerequisite for enrolling in PHY401; however, Lowers who wish to enroll in PHY401 without a year
of chemistry must seek department chair permission. For students who have completed a Chemistry sequence prior to enrolling in Physics,
those who have earned a 5 or better in CHM250, or have completed CHM300 or CHM550 should enroll in PHY401. Those who have
completed CHM250 with a grade of 4 or below should enroll in PHY300. Upon successful completion of PHY300, students may enroll in
PHY401 or PHY551 if they meet the math requirements.
Corequisite: Registration in at least MTH280 or MTH340.

80

Return to Table of Contents

College Physics II
PHY402
(T2)

A continuation of PHY401, the second term of the sequence covers electricity and magnetism, including Coulomb's Law, electric fields,
electric potential, and circuits. Laboratory work is integral to the course.
Prerequisite: Completion of PHY401.

College Physics III
PHY403
(T3)

A continuation of PHY402, the final term of the sequence covers wave motion, sound, light, optics, and various topics in modern physics,
including some combination of relativity, quantum mechanics, and atomic and nuclear physics. Laboratory work is integral to the course.
Prerequisite: Completion of PHY402

Astronomy
PHY440
(T1, T2, T3)

Astronomy is the scientific study of the origin, structure, and evolution of the universe and the objects in it. Topics may include patterns and
motions in the sky, gravity and orbits, telescopes and light, planetary systems, the birth and death of stars, galaxies, the Big Bang, the search
for extraterrestrial life, and the fate of the universe. This class includes a 45-minute lab period on Tuesday nights during study hours. When
the lab period is used, compensation time will be given during a daytime class period.
Prerequisite: Completion of or concurrent enrollment in one chemistry or physics course, and registration in at least MTH340.

Astrobiology: Life Among the Stars
PHY445 (may be taken as a Physics or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is PHY445)
(T3)

One credit assigned in Physics or Interdisciplinary. We invite you to embark on a journey to explore the field of astrobiology, the study of
the origin, evolution, and distribution of life in the universe, on and beyond planet Earth. We will begin our exploration by studying the
fundamentals of relevant sciences—physics, astronomy, chemistry, and biology—and will then apply these sciences to understand the potential requirements and limitations of life on Earth as well as on other planets and moons in our solar system. As we learn about historical and
current efforts to detect life on these bodies, we will consider objects resident in our own solar system, including Mars, the moons of Jupiter,
the moons of Saturn, and other solar system bodies such as Ceres and Pluto. Next, we will expand our view to include other possible abodes
of life outside of our solar system as discovered by modern astronomers and modern instrumentation (i.e., the Hubble and Kepler space
telescopes). Finally, we will examine the role of fictional alien biology on the human imagination through literature, film, and music.

Astronomy Research
PHY530
(T1, T2, T3)

In this course students will spend extensive time in the Phillips Academy Observatory, where they will learn to operate the telescope, dome,
and CCD camera. Students will learn techniques for visual observing, astrophotography, and photometry. Students will engage in research
projects designed to provide an introduction to research techniques in astronomy. When appropriate, results will be submitted for publication. In addition to conducting ongoing research projects, the class will take time out to observe interesting current events (observing the
pass of a near-Earth asteroid, a recent supernova flare-up, a transit of the ISS across the moon, etc.). In addition, students will be expected
to spend several hours a week in the observatory. Given weather constraints in New England, observing nights will vary.
Prerequisite: PHY440
Corequisite: Completion or concurrent enrollment in MTH510 or MTH570 or higher. Students may enroll in PHY530 for multiple terms;
scheduling preference will be given to students who are currently enrolled in PHY530. Students not meeting the prerequisite or corequisite
may take the course with the permission of the instructor.

Advanced Courses
Physics
PHY500
(T1)

For students interested in exploring physics primarily via an experimental approach. Working in small teams, students investigate in
detail an open-ended physics problem throughout the term. The chosen topics center on real-world, complex phenomena that are not fully
understood. After reproducing the phenomena, students probe related questions and problems by designing experiments, gathering data,
and building models. They learn to simplify complex problems to something solvable, retaining enough detail to bring meaningful understanding to the real-world phenomena. They refine their models to better explain and predict experimental results. Through this iterative
process students approach some truths that underlie our observation of the universe. The course may also serve as a launch pad for the USA

81

Return to Table of Contents

Invitational Young Physicists Tournament (USAYPT), which occurs each February in a different location. Participants present findings in a
structured format with questions, debate, and interaction among the students from different schools, all exploring the same topics.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of any three terms of physics.

Calculus-Based Mechanics I
PHY551
(T1, T3) THE FIRST TERM OF A NEW TWO-TERM SEQUENCE

This is the first term of a two-term sequence preparing students for the C level Advanced Placement examination in Mechanics as well as
entrance to honors-level programs in physics at the university level. Topics include kinematics, Newton’s laws, and energy. Calculus will be
used as required.
Prerequisite: Open to students who (a) will be enrolled in at least MTH580 or who have completed MTH575, and (b) have earned a 5 or
higher in their two most recent terms of math. Students enrolled in PHY402 may replace PHY403 with PHY551, if (a) they have earned
grades of 6 in PHY401 and PHY402, or (b) their instructor in PHY402 recommends them to the department chair. PHY401, PHY402, and
PHY551 together count as a yearlong science course toward the diploma requirement.

Calculus-Based Mechanics II
PHY552
(T1, T2)

A continuation of PHY551, this is the second term of the two-term sequence. Topics include orbital motion, center of mass, momentum,
simple harmonic motion, and rotational motion, and calculus will be used as required. Upon completion of PHY552, students will be prepared to take the C level Advanced Placement examination in Mechanics.
Prerequisite: Open to students who a) will be enrolled in at least MTH590 and b) have completed PHY551 with a grade of 4 or higher.

Calculus-Based Electricity and Magnetism I
PHY553
(T2, T3)

This is the first term of a two-term sequence preparing students for the C level Advanced Placement examination in Electricity and
Magnetism as well as entrance to honors-level programs in physics at the university level. Topics include Coulomb’s Law, electric fields,
electric potential, and capacitance. Calculus will be used as required.
Prerequisite: Open to students who (a) will be enrolled in at least MTH590, and (b) have completed PHY552 with a grade of 4 or higher.

Calculus-Based Electricity and Magnetism II
PHY554
(T1, T3)

This is the second term of the PHY553–PHY554 two-term sequence. Students in this course study circuits and magnetic fields in depth,
using calculus as required. At the completion of PHY554, students will be prepared to take the C level Advanced Placement examination in
Electricity and Magnetism.
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed PHY553.

Foundations of Modern Physics
PHY600
(T3)

We explore Einstein’s Special Theory of Relativity as well as select topics in quantum mechanics. Mathematical skills beyond calculus will be
developed in the course as needed. Topics will vary somewhat from year to year depending on the instructor.
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed or are concurrently enrolled in PHY554.

Fluid Mechanics
PHY630
(T1)

Students taking this course will learn about fluid statics and dynamics. Dimensional analysis and derivation of Bernoulli and Navier-Stokes
equations will provide the methods necessary for solving problems.
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed or are concurrently enrolled in PHY554.

Physics Seminar
PHY650
(T2)

The focus of this course is intermediate mechanics. Topics will vary according to the interests of the instructor and the students.
Prerequisite: Open to students who have completed PHY554.

82

Return to Table of Contents

Elective Courses Recently Taught but Not Offered in 2024–2025
The Art of Science Writing

Inheritance

BIO410

SCI440

The Root of It All: Plants in the Modern World

Bioethics: Humanity in the Post-Genomic Era

BIO430

SCI445

Microbiology

Dynamic Earth: Introduction to Earth System
Science

BIO450

Conservation Biology

SCI450

BIO460

Field Experiments: Putting Good Intentions to
the Test

Environmental Chemistry

SCI465

CHM487

Chemistry Research
CHM590

Electronics
PHY520

Sense of Place
SCI405

Darwin’s (R)Evolution
SCI475

Disease and Medicine in the United States:
Pox and Pestilence
SCI480
HSS480

The Brain and You—A User’s Guide
SCI490

Love That Dirty Water: The Global Sanitation
Challenge
SCI435

83

Return to Table of Contents

P HILOSOP HY & R ELI GI OUS STUDI ES
The department invites students into three distinctive human quests: the search for meaning, the search for justice, and the search for the
foundations of knowledge. These searches are lifelong pursuits. Our classes help students to pursue their own authentic directions for this
work by providing an introduction to outstanding literature in the field and cultivating the necessary skills and virtues for its pursuit.
The department diploma requirement is successful completion of any one-term course; this requirement applies only to those who attend
Phillips Academy for three or four years. Four-year students fulfill their requirement in the lower year. Our 300-level courses are primarily
intended for Lowers, but are open to Uppers with permission of the department chair. Students who have completed their required 300level course may take a second 300-level course as an elective in their Lower year if spaces are available. All 300-level courses are equivalent
rigor.

Asian Religions: An Introduction
PHR300
(T1)

This course examines religious traditions that originated and flourished in Asia and those that are practiced in Asia today. Using an
approach that is both critical and empathetic, students will explore the fundamental structures of belief, meaning, and practice that
constitute traditions including Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism, Islam, and Christianity alongside traditional regional religions. Through
the exploration of texts, film, and music, students will come to understand the diversity within each of these traditions and their multiple
manifestations throughout the world. In doing so, students also will explore their own essential questions of meaning in dialogue with these
traditions. Sources may include texts like the Tao Te Ching, films like the Tamil devotional musical Rajakali Amman, and music performed
by Islamic and Christian communities in Asia today. (Dr. Dugan)

Hebrew Bible
PHR320
(T1)

This course will introduce students to the sacred writings known as the Hebrew Bible, which form the scriptural basis for Judaism and
Christianity. The books that make up the Hebrew Bible span a broad range of cultures, geographical regions, and time periods. Yet they ultimately form a coherent narrative that has had an enormous influence on religion and culture over thousands of years. In this class, students
will read famous stories (the Garden of Eden, the 10 Commandments, David and Goliath) as well as explore some of the lesser-known gems
of the Hebrew biblical corpus. We will study the historical contexts from which the diverse texts collected in the Hebrew Bible emerged,
while also exploring the modern reception of these texts in film, art, and music. How these ancient writings gave rise to new communities
and new ways of understanding and living in the world are questions at the heart of this course. (Dr. Dugan)

New Testament
PHR330
(T2, T3)

This course will introduce students to the strange world of the New Testament—and the even stranger history of its interpretation. Topics
covered include the life and legacy of Jesus, the sometimes-kind, sometimes-vitriolic letters of Paul, the specifics of the apocalypse, and the
problem of separating magic from miracles. Students will build their skills in close reading to inspect and construct arguments, analyze past
attempts to bring the New Testament to life in film and visual art, and think carefully about how, and why, the tiny Jesus movement in a
minor province of the Roman empire became one of the world’s largest and most influential religions. (Dr. Washington)

Introduction to Ethics
PHR340
(T1, T2, T3)

Students in this discussion course will be introduced to a variety of approaches to ethical reflection. Through the use of classical texts and
personal and literary stories, students will develop a common vocabulary with which to understand and critically evaluate their moral experience. (Mr. Spencer, Dr. Bhardwaj)

Proof and Persuasion
PHR360
(T1, T2, T3)

This is a practical introduction to informal logic and to the philosophical study of language. Some of the questions raised are the following:
What is the difference between a good argument and a poor one? What are the common fallacies of thought? What are the limitations of
logic? The course stresses the development of individual skill in argument and includes a critical examination of the patterns of thought one
encounters every day in the media as well as strategies for constructive disagreement. (Dr. Hay)

Views of Human Nature
PHR370
(T2, T3)

A critical examination of selected traditional and contemporary views of human nature with the following questions in mind: Do we have
a characteristic nature? What are our basic needs, purposes, rights, obligations, and values? To what extent are our actions determined by
heredity and instinct? Are we free? Are we responsible for our actions? How ought we make generalizations in general, and about human
beings in particular? Class discussions and written exercises are designed to encourage participants to develop views of their own against a
background of a basic understanding of the readings. (Dr. Dugan, Dr. Bhardwaj)

84

Return to Table of Contents

Faith and Doubt
PHR380
(T1, T2, T3)

What are the fundamental beliefs by which we live? How do we form, inform, and reform these beliefs? In this course, students will explore
the nature of belief by undertaking critical examination of philosophical and religious texts. Students will also examine contemporary contexts for belief—intellectual, cultural, and social—in order to address questions concerning ultimate being and reality. (Mr. Spencer)

500-Level Electives
Our 500-level courses are open to Uppers and Seniors. Lowers may take a 500-level course with the permission
of the department chair and provided that they have already taken a 300-level course in the department.

Responses to Atrocity
PHR501
(T1)

This course is an exploration of atrocities—how great evils (such as genocide, slavery, war rape, etc.) are experienced by victims, perpetrators,
and bystanders. Questions we address will include: What distinguishes evils from ordinary wrongs? What is the nature of dehumanization at
the heart of atrocity? What do we make of those who have committed or contributed to atrocities? The class will include study of historical
atrocities, with a focus on the Holocaust. The course will also cover resistance, hope, and despair in the face of evil. A central text will be
Claudia Card’s The Atrocity Paradigm as well as texts written about specific atrocities (e.g., The Sunflower, Ordinary Men). (Dr. Bhardwaj)

One Good Book: The Bible
PHR503
(T2)

This course is for students who want to do a deep dive into a significant and rich religious or philosophical text to practice the skills of close
reading, textual interpretation, and analysis. By focusing on one key source, students will be able to examine a philosophical work as a whole
and give sustained and detailed attention to a particular tradition.
This year, students will read individual books from the Bible, chosen according to student interest. Students will unpack and critically
engage the answers provided by biblical writings to fundamental human questions, including: Why do bad things happen to good people?
What happened “in the beginning” and why does it matter? What happens after we die? What does God want humans to do, and how do we
know? And what is God like, anyway? (Dr. Dugan)

Global Islams
PHR512
(T2)

With nearly two billion practitioners, Islam is one of the fastest growing religious traditions in the world today. Yet, with less than 1 percent
of the American population identifying as Muslim, it is also one of the most misunderstood here in the United States. What is Islam? What
is not Islam? And who gets to decide? This course aims to introduce students to the vast internal complexities of the Islamic tradition
through an exploration of history, scripture, law, film, comic books, and social media. We will investigate and contextualize controversial
(and popularly misunderstood) elements of Islamic tradition, such as jihad, sharia, and veiling. From Malcolm X to Ms. Marvel, from China
to Cairo to Chicago, students will examine the practices, lives, and legacies of Muslims in history and today. (Dr. Dugan)

Religion, Literature, and the Arts: Crime, Punishment, and Justice
PHR513
(T1, T3)

Is the justice system…just? Was it ever? Can it ever be? For thousands of years, human societies have wrestled with their role in mediating
justice. One way this has come to pass is in the creation of criminal justice systems to punish acts named by states and societies as crimes.
But what is justice, and who gets to imagine, deliver, and enact it? Who defines crime, and how? And what responsibility do we have to care,
and act? Students will explore constructions of crime, punishment, and justice in foundational ancient texts (the Book of Job, the Oresteia),
famous science-fiction dystopias (Philip K. Dick, Ursula LeGuin), plays and memoirs by incarcerated Americans (It’s A Hard Truth, Ain’t It,
New Jersey Prison Theatre Cooperative), and philosophy written by modern abolitionists (Angela Davis, Derecka Purnell). (Dr. Washington)

Existentialism
PHR520
(T1, T3)

Why are we here? How do we cope with death? What is the meaning of it all? Existentialism is concerned with questions having to do with
our place in the world, keeping in mind, deeply, the finitude of the human condition. In this course, we will explore a number of canonical
texts, focusing on Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Sartre, de Beauvoir, Camus, and Ellison. We will ponder the nature of our existence, the death
of God, and our struggle against fate. We will also engage with existentialist themes in literature and film. We aim to answer, for ourselves:
what is being human all about? (Dr. Hay)

85

Return to Table of Contents

Law and Morality
PHR521
(T2, T3)

A critical examination of issues that arise out of the relationship between law and morality. Questions of concern include the following: For
what reasons, if any, should an individual obey or disobey the laws of society? Which kinds of governments (monarchy, aristocracy, democracy, etc.), if any, are legitimate? To what degree should society restrict the freedom of individuals through laws on matters like abortion, pornography, race, and sexual relations? Class discussions and written exercises are designed to encourage participants to develop views of their
own against a background of basic understanding of the readings. (Dr. Bhardwaj, Mr. Spencer)

Feminist Philosophies
PHR522 (may be taken as a Philosophy and Religious Studies or Interdisciplinary course;
official course number is PHR522)
(T3)

One credit assigned in Philosophy/Religious Studies or Interdisciplinary. This course will address feminist moral and political theories.
There is no singular “feminism,” and feminists disagree with each other on the answers to many of those moral and political claims. We will
survey a variety of feminisms. The course will also cover topics including sex and gender, the nature of oppression, intersectionality (including discussions of race, disability, gender identity, and class), and sexual ethics. Special topics will be chosen by students for further focus,
but could include topics such as body shaming, trafficking, or understandings of masculinity. (Dr. Bhardwaj)

Aesthetics
PHR523
(T2)

This course probes questions concerning art’s definition, production, and evaluation. What is art’s purpose? Is there a standard of taste
for beautiful or good art? How should we respond to controversial art? How does art created by people differ from art generated by AI?
Students will read views on the philosophy of art by thinkers such as Plato, Aristotle, Nietzsche, Danto, and Benjamin, Murdoch, Nussbaum,
and Taylor. Students will also use the Addison Gallery of American Art’s collection for exploring course themes. (Dr. Hay)

Ethics: Medicine
PHR530 (may be taken as a Philosophy/Religious Studies or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is PHR530)
(T1)

One credit assigned in Philosophy/Religious Studies or Interdisciplinary. Modern medical research and practice present society with
new opportunities and significant challenges. Students in this course will look at various case studies at the intersection of medicine, scientific research, health care, and ethics. Possible case studies may include debates about abortion, euthanasia, animal rights, and broader
environmental implications of scientific and material progress in the 21st century. Classical and contemporary philosophers will be read as
part of our investigation into these topics. (Dr. Bhardwaj)

Ethics and the Environment
PHR531 (may be taken as a Philosophy/Religious Studies or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is PHR531)
(T1, T3)

One credit assigned in Philosophy/Religious Studies or Interdisciplinary. We are facing unprecedented environmental challenges
to climate, life forms, human health and population, and essential resources. We tend to treat such issues simply as scientific or political
problems. In reality, ecological controversies raise fundamental questions about what we human beings value, the kind of beings we are, the
kinds of lives we should lead, and our place in nature. Sustainability is not possible without a deep change of values and commitment. In
short, environmental problems raise fundamental questions of ethics and philosophy. This course seeks to provide a systematic introduction
to those questions. (Dr. Hay)

Ethics and Technology
PHR532 (may be taken as a Philosophy/Religious Studies or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is PHR532)
(T3)

One credit assigned in Philosophy/Religious Studies or Interdisciplinary. From the use of fire to written natural and computational
languages to advances in agriculture, weaponry, industry, science, medicine, communication, and artificial intelligence, human technologies
have transformed our world. They also have added new complexities to the challenge of answering fundamental philosophical questions.
This course examines the ethical context around the design and implementation of various forms of technology. Subject areas include but
are not limited to: the nature and value of privacy, algorithmic bias, inclusive design, the ethics of AI, and the politics of technological systems. (Dr. Bhardwaj)

Global Justice
PHR533
(T2)

Open to Uppers and Seniors. What is justice and what does it demand of us as individuals and members of communities? In this course, we
will explore a wide range of conceptions of justice, starting with Middle Kingdom Egypt up to the present day, and will distinguish between
kinds of justice, such as restorative and distributive justice.
Through reading, writing, and collaborative discussion, participants will work together to develop a deeper understanding of how we may
apply justice on a global scale. Course texts include those by Kwame Anthony Appiah, Plato, Claudia Rankine, and John Rawls. (Dr. Hay)

86

Return to Table of Contents

Ethics of Blame and Forgiveness
PHR534
(T2)

This course explores the ethics of blame and forgiveness. When we see harm done, it’s natural to immediately look for who to blame or
punish. However, questions of blame aren’t quite that sim-ple. We might ask: Does a person’s intentions matter for whether they deserve
blame—what if the harm is unintentional, or a matter of bad luck? How do we assign responsibility when a group or a community as a whole
seems at fault, as in oppression or climate change? What if our shaming and blaming behaviors don’t “work,” as when the person becomes
defensive and continues the behav-ior? Similarly, forgiveness is full of thorny questions: What is forgiveness “for”? Is forgiveness ever “owed,”
as to a sincerely repentant wrongdoer? Are there actions that are unforgivable? This course will explore work by Desmond Tutu, Martha
Nussbaum, Susan Wolf, and other philosophers and thinkers. The course may also explore related topics in moral psychology, such as anger,
resentment, contempt, disgust, and hope. (Dr. Bhardwaj)

Baseball and Philosophy
PHR541
(T1)

This course explores topics in philosophy and applied ethics through the lens of America’s Pas-time: baseball. Class topics may include
parallels between sports fandom and religious belief and belonging (Is Red Sox Nation a religion?); the proud but furtive history of “lying”
and stealing signs in baseball (Would Immanuel Kant cork his bat?); the Negro Leagues, “desegregation” of organized baseball, and diverse
Black philosophies of resistance (Would Jackie Robinson have kneeled with Colin Kaepernick?); economic philosophy and the currently
developing labor battles (and lockout) over player compensation (Does Mike Trout deserve a billion-dollar contract?); the applied ethics
of sportsmanship (Should you steal when your team is way ahead? Should you cele-brate when you hit a crucial homerun?); the aesthetics
of baseball, and the struggle for the Ameri-can spirit (What does Field of Dreams show about the American Dream?) The class will explore
baseball through philosophical writing, observing games, and even some simulated gameplay. Strong knowledge of baseball will be assumed,
and students with a playing background in softball or baseball are particularly encouraged to join. (Dr. Dugan)

Philosophy and Religious Studies Research
PHR600
(T2)

This course serves as an opportunity for students to explore their passion for the subject of philosophy and/or religious studies through
research in the field and the development of a scholarly project of their own. After reinforcing scholarly practices in the discipline, students
will apply them to a project with a direction of their own choosing. Students should expect to spend a significant amount of time reading
articles from journals and books in the discipline of focus, and will create material that is a scholarly work in the field (e.g., a journal-style
paper). Students interested in advanced work in this department should enroll in PHR600 instead of applying for an IP. Class size may be
limited. (Dr. Bhardwaj)
Prerequisite: One 500-level PHR course, or permission of the department chair and the instructor.

Elective Courses Recently Taught but Not Offered in 2024–2025
Religions of the Book
PHR310

Nonviolence and Social Change
PHR502

Religion in America: One Nation, Under God(s)?
PHR510

Global Buddhisms: Past, Present, and Future
PHR511

87

Return to Table of Contents

P HYSI CA L EDUCATI ON
Physical Education and Lifetime Wellness
PHD200
(T1, T2, T3)

PHD200 embraces a holistic approach that includes the interdependence of movement, sleep, nutrition, and mindset and their effect on
personal wellness. In this course, instructors partner with members of the Sykes Wellness Center team to cover topics such as hygiene, infection prevention, nutrition, healthy relationships, and substances; safe decision-making and personal responsibility are stressed. In addition,
an indoor ropes course is utilized to promote positive risk-taking, trust-building, and communication. Individual agency as well as one’s contribution to the greater group are key aspects of the course. PHD200 students must complete our graduation requirement of a 25-yard swim
assessment, separate and distinct from the drown-proofing unit. Student assessment is based on their engagement, participation, effort, and
personal reflections. (Pass/Fail course)

88

Return to Table of Contents

TH EATR E & DANCE
The Department of Theatre & Dance provides opportunities to investigate the human condition by exploring creative expression through
collaboration in live performance, classroom work, and co-curricular activities.
• The theatre program is designed to empower, inspire, and transform students through the art of live storytelling. The curriculum is
grounded in the investigation of the human condition within a collaborative production experience. Throughout the process, we foster an
inclusive environment for student performers to express themselves creatively.
• The dance program is designed to educate students and the extended community to the concept of dance as a form of communication
and expression fundamental to all cultures. Ballet and modern dance are used as a foundation for teaching technique. Additionally, it
is essential to expose students to a range of diverse dance forms along with choreography and composition as they explore dance as a
language. The student’s exposure to dance culminates in vibrant performance offerings that expand the community’s knowledge and
enrich the overall cultural environment.
• The department’s Design and Production program enables students to become involved in all aspects of theatrical production.
Students have the opportunity to participate in the design process for department productions and serve as the technical crew during
performances. The department offers courses in costume, lighting, set design, and stagecraft. Classes and productions give students
practical, hands-on experience with collaborative work designing, constructing, and implementing creative ideas onstage.
Students are subject to the following visual and performing arts graduation requirement:
• Entering Juniors must earn no fewer than four credits in art, music, and theatre and dance. Students may fulfill two of these four credits
by completing any two academic theatre and dance courses.
• Entering Lowers must earn no fewer than three credits in art, music, and theatre and dance. Students may fulfill one of these three credits
by completing any academic theatre and dance course.

Intro to Theatre and Dance
THD210
(T1, T2)

Why do we make live performances? What does it take to create a production? This course explores the foundations of theatre and dance.
How the different elements of directing, costume design, scenic design, lighting design, dancing, and acting—combine to create a unified
production for an audience. In the process, students will learn the vocabulary of the stage and develop a conceptual framework for creating
a performance. This course is team-taught by members of the Department of Theatre and Dance. Students will rotate through introductory
units, which could vary from term to term.

Acting I
THD250
(T1, T2, T3)

Open to Lowers and Juniors only, this course is designed for students with little or no acting experience. By doing exercises in movement
and voice production, reading, improvisation, and scenes, a student who is curious about the theatre may determine whether he or she has
ability or interest in acting while learning something of the process of characterization—the major responsibility of the actor. The emphasis
is on the variety of acting experiences rather than on a polished final product.

Dance I
THD251
(T1, T2, T3)

All peoples and cultures dance. This course investigates why we dance as a representation of culture, as a form of communication and
expression, and as a way of understanding our world. Students will look at various forms of dance generally and then delve more
specifically into works of art that shape American concert and pop culture dance. Students will watch and analyze dance, research dance
pioneers, and learn examples of significant and pivotal choreography. The class will learn about and do various forms of dance and will culminate with students using techniques and theories learned to develop their own composition. No prior dance experience needed.

Acting I for Uppers and Seniors
THD310
(T3)

Open to Uppers and Seniors, this course is designed for students with little or no acting experience. By doing exercises in movement and
voice production, reading, improvisation, and scenes, a student who is curious about the theatre may determine whether he or she has ability
or interest in acting while learning something of the process of characterization—the major responsibility of the actor. The emphasis is on
the variety of acting experiences rather than on a polished final product.

Lighting Design
THD320
(T2)

This course introduces the fundamentals of lighting design for theatrical and dance productions. Students will learn to use a design concept
to make choices about how to express the theme and mood of a play or dance to enhance the storytelling of a production. The course will
also enable students to work hands-on with lighting equipment in Theatre and Dance Department spaces as they learn how to manipulate
the controllable properties of light: direction, intensity, color, pattern, movement, diffusion, and composition. The course places a heavy
emphasis on self and peer critique of work and on revising work.

89

Return to Table of Contents

Costuming
THD321
(T1, T2, T3)

An introductory exploration into the areas of costume design and costume construction, this course will highlight primary design elements
utilized in costume design for the stage and screen (i.e., line, color, tone, texture, movement, mood composition, balance, and focus). The
course will examine historical period silhouette and the art and craft of the stage costume. Practical experience will be given in areas including construction, flat patterning, draping, and fabric manipulation.

Scene Design
THD325
(T1)

This course introduces students to the design process and elements that inform the scenic designer’s choices when designing for theatrical
performances. Focus will be on the use of a conceptual approach to design scenery that coveys the themes and mood of a script and creates a
cohesive and effective design for a show. To create designs, the class will use several creative tools, including computer drafting software and
the resources of “The Nest” makerspace in the library. The design process will include several steps, such as written concept statements, visual
research, sketching/drafting and model making. The course places a heavy emphasis on self and peer critique of work and on revising work.

Theory and History of Live Performance
THD330
(T3)

Not open to Juniors. After a long hiatus, the course on Hip Hop Theatre is back. Students will explore the intersection between the elements
of Hip Hop music and culture with contemporary performance theory. Through close reading, listening to music, and creating live performance, students will discover how elastic theatre is and why Hip Hop is more than a pop-culture phenomenon. Like the music, the styles
and content varying widely ranging from solo playwright/performers to large ensemble plays. Students will be encouraged to think of live
performance as a jumping off point of social activism, popular culture, and political discourse.

Stage Craft
THD380
(T3)

Open to Juniors and Lowers only. This is a practicum course in which students work on the technical elements for faculty-directed dance
and theatre productions being produced by the department in that term. Skills learned will depend on the requirements of the particular
show. Some lab hours to be arranged outside of class time.

Public Speaking
THD420
(T2, T3)

Not open to Juniors. The course has a dual objective: to learn how to speak easily in front of others, and to learn how to construct a speech
and perform the speech in English. Students give prepared speeches on a variety of topics.

Acting II
THD510
(T3)

This course is designed for students with acting experience and a serious commitment to the art form. Students will build on their existing
skills through in-depth character work and scene study, pushing their understanding of themselves and acting by exploring challenging
scenes and exercises. Special emphasis will be placed on the performance of subtext, compositional texture, and character analysis through
verbal and nonverbal communication in a rigorous rehearsal setting.
Prerequisite: Previous completion of THD250 or completion of THD900-level course.

Directing
THD520
(T2)

Not open to Juniors. Since directing plays is the most complex of theatrical tasks, this course will focus on methods to unlock the life of a
script in the realization of production. Studies will include historic styles and productions, emphasizing their staging. Students will learn
the dynamics of floor plans and their effect on blocking, the potentials for lighting and its effect on mood, the importance of rhythm and
spectacle, and strategies to harness them. While no class on directing can function without including discussion of the actor’s craft, this class
will only touch on this area.

Choreographic Elements
THD525
(T2)

This course investigates choreographing dances in a variety of genres and styles for the stage. Students will be led through explorations
and formal exercises to learn how to generate and manipulate movement in clear and innovative fashions. Coursework will culminate in a
final presentation of original compositions. Students will also examine and analyze works of professional choreographers to gain a deeper
understanding of dance elements and choreographic tools. Ultimately, students will deepen their understanding of movement as a form of
communication and expression.

90

Return to Table of Contents

Contemporary Drama
THD512DR (may be taken as a Theatre, English ENG512DR, or Interdisciplinary course;
official course number is ENG512DR)
(T1)

One credit assigned in Theatre, English, or Interdisciplinary. This course will be devoted to major dramatists from the late 20th- and
early 21st-century. Each term, students will read plays through the lenses of race, class, faith, gender, sexual orientation, and other socially
constructed markers. We will attempt to locate the playwrights within and counter to social movements and approach their plays through
historical, cultural, and political contexts. Students will analyze how the best playwrights pose and dramatize important questions of the
time through both writing and staging.
ENG512DR, Term 1—American Drama. Playwrights studied may include August Wilson, Susan-Lori Parks, David Henry Hwang, Anna
Deavere Smith, Nilos Cruz, Quiarra Alegria Hudes, Tony Kushner, Paula Vogel, Jose Rivera, and Lynn Nottage.

Lynn Nottage
THD531LN (may be taken as an English ENG531LN, Theatre, or Interdisciplinary course;
official course number is ENG531LN)
(T3)

One credit assigned in Theatre, English, or Interdisciplinary. Lynn Nottage is currently the first and only two-time Pulitzer–Prize winning woman playwright. Her notable works include Sweat and Intimate Apparel, and many of them explore the world of working-class
Black Americans. This course will explore her works and their impact in shaping current dramatic literature and performance.

Asian/American Dramatic Literature
THD541DR (may be taken as a Theatre, English ENG541DR, or Interdisciplinary course;
official course number is ENG541 DR)
(T2)

One credit assigned in Theatre, English, or Interdisciplinary. This course explores the ever-expanding body of work that collectively
(and not always neatly) contributes to what may be called “Asian/American” dramatic literature. Students will read and engage with plays by
Asian American dramatists from the 20th- and 21st-century through the lenses of class, faith, gender, sexual orientation, and other socially
constructed markers and dimensions of human experience and identity, with a particular focus on the social formation of race and the complexity of racial dynamics in the United States historically and today. Additional material will be examined so that we can better understand
the role of dramatic literature in our nation’s struggles over identity, power, resources and representation.

Performance-Based Courses
The THD900 series courses are classes that culminate in a public performance that is part of the Department of Theatre and Dance season.
Enrollment is audition and/or application based. Auditions are typically held during the term preceding the production in the week following mid-term, unless otherwise noted in the individual course description. Please see the Theatre and Dance PAnet space for more
detailed audition times and for the link to sign up for an audition slot. These courses count toward a student’s total course load, which may
not exceed six courses. Departmental dance performances are also offered, as scheduled by the department, through the Dance as a Sport
athletic programing at the recital and ensemble levels.

Advanced Practical Theatre Performance
THD901

Each member of the class will assume a specific role: lead actor, director, stage manager, and playwright. All students are expected to work
collaboratively through the creative process. Rehearsal schedules will be determined on a case-by-case basis. This course will culminate in a
performance scheduled in conjunction with the department. See introductory notes to 900-level performance-based courses. Only students
who have taken Directing (THD520) will be eligible to direct a THD901 project. Rehearsals will take place during a scheduled class period.
THD901 course notes: Auditions will be held during the course registration period. Students will be selected to participate and must get
approval from department chair.
Prerequisite: Student director must have taken THD520 and receive project approval from the department.

Advanced Studies in Dance Performance
THD902

Students will assume a specific role as choreographer or dancer. Rehearsal schedules will be determined on a case-by-case basis. Students
will actively engage in the creative process through identifying a creative problem, researching supportive material, and assessing and
revising their work. Students will collaborate with lighting designers as well as other designers/performers as determined. The course will
culminate in a performance scheduled in conjunction with the department. See introductory notes to 900-level performance-based courses.
THD902 course notes: Auditions will be held during the course registration period. Students will be selected to participate and must get
approval from department chair. Rehearsals will take place during a scheduled class period.
Prerequisites: Student choreographer must have taken THD525 and receive project approval from the department.

91

Return to Table of Contents

Advanced Studies in Technical Theatre Production
THD903

The exact focus of the project will be developed by the student with faculty input and approved by the theatre department. Examples include
designing and creating a set of costumes for a dance show or creating a sound design for a faculty-directed production. Students will be
expected to work collaboratively with a project mentor, the director, and other designers of the show. The course will culminate in execution
of their design in a performance scheduled by the department. See introductory notes to 900-level performance-based courses.
Prerequisites: THD320, -321, -325, or -380, and project approval from the department.

Identity
THD910 (may be taken as a Theatre or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is THD910)
(T1)

One credit assigned in Theatre or Interdisciplinary. This course, not open to Juniors, explores the intersection of writing and performance through an investigation of personal identity and will be taught collaboratively by instructors who specialize in each area. The course
will culminate in a performance of a devised theatre piece of the student’s creation before a live audience. Designed for students with acting
experience and a serious commitment to the art form, students will build off their existing skills through in-depth character work and scene
study and push their understanding of themselves and acting by exploring their own identity. Students will be encouraged to “think theatrical,” or think theatrically, engaging in a search for the connection between literary themes, historical context, and personal identity. Over the
term, the class will gain insight into the roles that race, class, gender, sexual orientation, and faith affects our daily existence and live performance. Lastly, students will experience and examine how live performance interacts with public discourse, civil disobedience, and art.

Musical Production: TBD
THD914
(T3)

This musical performance to be announced in the fall term. It will rehearse during a class block and will include regular Wednesday evening
and weekend rehearsals in the spring term.
Please check the Theatre and Dance PAnet space for audition details.

Devised Performance: Why We Vote
THD915
(T1)

This course explores what voting means to people in our community and family. It will culminate in a live performance curated from interviews conducted by the student ensemble. This course is designed for students with acting experience and an activist spirit. Over the term,
the students will gain insight into the roles that race, class, gender, sexual orientation, faith, and globalization impacts who votes and what
voting means.
This production will rehearse during a class block and will include regular Wednesday evening and weekend rehearsals. Technical rehearsals
and performances will be October 29 through November 2. Please check the Theatre and Dance PAnet space for audition details.

Play Production: R.U.R. (Rossum’s Universal Robots)
THD921
(T2)

R.U.R., the renowned Czech science fiction thriller that brought the word Robot to the English language over 100 years ago is being
produced in the winter term. Karel Čapek’s play is being given a contemporary adaption by our own playwright-in-residence Dr. Baldyga,
bringing R.U.R. into a direct conversation with today’s technology through its prescient questions not only about technology, but also consciousness and the nature of humanity. The original play influenced both popular culture and scientific research, leaving its mark on shows
such as Blade Runner and Westworld, and on technological advances such as ChatGPT. For over a century, Čapek’s robots have sparked our
collective imagination.
The rehearsal process will be a collaborative ensemble experience that will focus on exploration and experimentation. This production will
rehearse during the athletic block and will include regular Wednesday evening and weekend rehearsals. Technical rehearsals and performances will be February 16–23, 2025. Please check the Theatre and Dance PAnet space for audition details.

92

Return to Table of Contents

Elective Courses Recently Taught but Not Offered in 2024–2025
Sound Design
THD326

Performance Art: The Creative Self
THD370

Play Writing
ENG507PW

World Drama
THD513DR or ENG513DR

August Wilson’s View of the 20th Century: His Pittsburgh, Our America
THD531 or ENG531AW

August Wilson’s View of the Second Half of the 20th Century
THD532 or ENG532AW

Choreography II
THD565

93

Return to Table of Contents

WOR L D L ANGUAGES
Andover’s requirement of language study rests on the firm belief that direct acquaintance, through language, with the culture and people of
other lands, contemporary or ancient, is a psychological and intellectual resource of inestimable value for each individual, for every country,
and for our common world.
The diploma requirement is usually satisfied by successful completion, in one language, of three terms at the 300 level. To encourage
students to consider studying a language that may not have been available to them prior to coming to Andover, the Division of World
Languages also will allow students, by petition, to fulfill the requirement by successfully completing at Phillips Academy a total of three
levels in two different languages, as long as at least one is a “less-commonly taught” language (Chinese, German, Ancient Greek, Japanese, or
Russian). This alternative, the 2+1 path, must be done by successfully completing at least one full year in one language, and at least two full
years in another. Students who are fluent in another language besides English may petition to bypass the language requirement if they are
coming directly from a local public school (i.e., not international or American) conducted entirely in that language. Such exemptions are rare
and must be requested from the head of World Languages by August 1 to be considered for the fall.
Placement of new students in languages they have previously studied will be based on a provisional placement test, on the questionnaires
sent to them and their current language teachers in the spring, and, when appropriate, on a personal interview with the head of World
Languages. A student who places above the 300 level is not automatically excused from our language requirement; they must validate their
proficiency through at least one term of study at Phillips Academy at the 400 level or above.
Each of our languages, ancient and modern, may be started appropriately by students of any grade. Most Andover students continue their
language study beyond the third year, and some add a second or even a third language to their program.
In the case of modern languages, the world language is the language of the classroom. In conversation, in reading, and in writing, the goal is
direct communication in the world language rather than communication through translation. At all levels of instruction, attention is focused
both on language skills and on the literature, history, and various art forms of the people whose languages are being studied.

Chinese
Mandarin Chinese has the most native speakers among all languages mainly due to China’s large population. In addition to China, Mandarin
is also spoken in Chinese communities of other countries worldwide. From the utilitarian perspective, sufficient proficiency of Mandarin
can be an asset in the job market, can help to promote economic growth, and can assist intercultural communication. From the developmental perspective, learning Mandarin (and all languages), can allow learners to experience additional ways of thinking, feeling, and acting
that may be unavailable in their native linguistic- and cultural environment. This kind of learning may nurture cross-cultural empathy and
solidarity.
The Chinese Department aims to support all students, whether they are new learners or have had previous experience, to acquire the
pragmatic language skills and enjoy the developmental benefits of learning an additional language. There are two separate tracks of Chinese
courses offered by the department. The non-heritage track comprises six levels of courses focusing on the mechanisms of the language, the
appropriate use of the language within the corresponding sociocultural contexts, and critical reflection on the mutual influence between
language and culture. The heritage track fosters literary scholarship by immersing students in classic, modern, and contemporary texts and
by stimulating reflection on the interrelationship between literature and its socio-historical contexts.

First-Level Chinese
CHI100A
CHI100B
CHI100C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

CHI100 is the beginning-level Chinese course. In this course, students will learn the vocabulary, grammar, and cultural information that can
help them develop novice-level language proficiency and the cultural competence needed to appropriately engage in everyday communication in Chinese. The knowledge and skills (i.e., listening, speaking, reading, and writing) will be learned and practiced in the context of one’s
personal life (e.g., hobbies, family, friends) and public life (e.g., school activities, shopping, transportation). Additional authentic materials will be used to complement the textbook so that what is learned and practiced can be translated into the spontaneous ability to use the
language in a culturally appropriate way to accomplish basic tasks in a wide range of everyday contexts.

Second-Level Chinese
CHI200A
CHI200B
CHI200C
(T1, T2, T3) (THREE-TERM COMMITMENT)

This course continues to emphasize proficiency in everyday situations. Students enlarge their inventory of words and phrases while also
developing a deeper understanding of the essential features of Chinese grammar.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of CHI100 or equivalent.

Accelerated Chinese Sequence
CHI220
(T1)

CHI220 follows CHI120 and precedes CHI320 as part of an accelerated sequence. Because of the fast pace, each student’s progress will be
closely monitored during Term 1 to see whether it is in their best interest to rejoin CHI200 for the remainder of the year or to continue the
accelerated sequence in CHI320 in Term 2 and Term 3. The course focuses on building oral and written proficiency on daily topics with

94

Return to Table of Contents

student-centered activities. Texts, supplementary readings, and audio and video materials are used to provide a rich and complete learning
experience.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of CHI100.

Third-Level Chinese
CHI300A
CHI300B
CHI300C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This course provides more emphasis on reading and writing. Students are introduced to longer texts, covering such topics as family life,
social issues, and aspects of Chinese culture.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of CHI200 or equivalent.

Accelerated Chinese Sequence
CHI320A
CHI320B
(T2, T3) TWO-TERM COMMITMENT

This third-level course follows CHI220 and continues the accelerated sequence of “three years in two” started in CHI120. The course moves
at a fast pace and expects students to do thorough preparation and review independently outside of class. Much of the class time is devoted
to oral proficiency development on concrete topics that are related to high school student lives and their perspectives. All students are
expected to participate actively in class at the individual, small group, and whole class levels. Written proficiency is equally important for this
course. Students are expected to practice and improve writing through various tasks, including essay and other types of written assignments.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of CHI220 or equivalent.

Fourth-Level Chinese
CHI400A
CHI400B
CHI400C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

Increased use of authentic materials is employed as more sophisticated aspects of language and culture are explored. In particular, students
are exposed to the more formal written style of Chinese, which is prevalent in newspapers, on street signs, etc.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of CHI300 or equivalent.

Accelerated Chinese Sequence
CHI420A
CHI420B
CHI420C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

The course is designed for intermediate learners who have acquired basic Chinese cultural knowledge and feel comfortable engaging in
further exploration of this topic. In addition to continued language acquisition through listening, speaking, reading, and writing, students
also will become familiar with Chinese literature, history, and current events.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of CHI320 or equivalent.

Advanced Chinese Sequence
CHI520A
CHI520B
CHI520C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This intensive course is designed to help students build on the grammar and vocabulary they have learned in previous years to develop
formal literacy. Topics explored include Chinese cuisines, idioms, new technology, education, diplomacy, and China as a fast-evolving society
redefining itself in a modern, globalized world. The course will culminate in individualized cultural research projects which students will
share in writing and in the form of oral presentations.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of CHI400 or CHI420 or permission of the department chair.

Advanced Topics in Chinese
CHI621
CHI622 (may be taken as a Chinese or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is CHI622)
CHI623
(T1, T2, T3)

CHI621, Term 1—Screening Contemporary China: Chinese Language, Culture and Society through Films. The goal of this course is to
immerse students in authentic language and culture through Chinese films and TV shows as a way to understand aspects of Chinese national
and cultural identity. It is hoped that the course not only will help students cultivate a greater command of language over analysis and theorization of Chinese cinema, but also will help facilitate students’ understanding of Chinese culture in the context of globalization.

95

Return to Table of Contents

CHI622, Term 2—LGBTQ+ Literature and Media in China. It might be surprising to many that there has been a literary and social media
movement toward LGBTQ+ advocacy in China and other parts of Asia at the grassroots level. Working within a unique system of political
censorship in China grounded in Confucianistic beliefs, LGBTQ+ literature is thriving through a variety of forms of literacy including online books, manga, Anime, audio drama, television shows and social media. This literary movement is entirely consistent with the traditional
Chinese culture and a history of the oppressed people fighting for freedom of expression and justice in creative ways. In this course, students
will read works from the “Pure Love” genre – the literary genre that advocates for the idea of “love is love, regardless of gender,” with a focus
on works about Chinese high school students’ lives. Students will also explore various forms of popular media that feature transgender and
gender non-conforming people in order to better understand the concept of gender expressions within the Chinese context. Students will
reflect on how this movement is both a manifestation of deeply ingrained Chinese values such as staying true to oneself and showing resilience in the face of obstacles, and a continuation of the tradition of using literature for collective healing and empowerment.
CHI623, Term 3—Chinglish. Chinglish is a comedy about an American businessman trying to strike deals in China and the miscommunication that ensured. It was written by the Chinese American playwright and Tony Award winner David Henry Hwang, and opened on
Broadway in 2011. In this course, students will read, study and perform Scenes 1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 12 and 13 of this bilingual play. As part of the
coursework, students will reflect on the expected and unexpected differences in language, cultures, customs and manners, as well as how
humor can transcend languages—even when things are not so easily translatable.
Prerequisites: Completion of CHI500 or CHI520 or permission of the department.

Courses for Advanced Heritage Learners
Introduction to Chinese Literature
CHI540A
CHI540B
CHI540C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This course is designed for Juniors and Lowers with near-native fluency in spoken Chinese and familiarity with Chinese culture. It provides
an overview of the historical timeline of literature through a brief introduction to a selection of China’s representative literary works, from
classical poetry and essays to modern and contemporary novels. In addition to learning words and expressions in authentic Chinese texts,
students will also develop critical thinking skills, improve independent reading and writing skills through class discussion and essay writing,
and understand and appreciate the historical significance and cultural value of Chinese literature.
Prerequisite: Permission of the department chair.

Modern China and Chinese Literature for Advanced Heritage Learners
CHI641
CHI642
CHI643
(T1, T2, T3)

This course is designed for students with sufficient Mandarin proficiency and knowledge of Chinese culture to analyze and discuss literary
and non-literary texts. It provides students with ongoing and varied opportunities to further develop their language skills through work with
authentic written materials, videos, scripts, news, short stories, essays, and award-winning science fiction novels. This sequence of courses is
offered in the fall CHI641, winter CHI642, and spring CHI643.
CHI641, Term 1—This term focuses on establishing acceptance of identity and deepening students’ immersion into Chinese culture, by
exploring a variety of literature throughout the Chinese-speaking world. Students will watch, research, and discuss topics through authentic
written materials, contemporary documentaries, scripts, news, short stories, and essays. In addition to learning words and expressions in
authentic Chinese texts, students will develop critical thinking skills and improve their independent reading and writing skills through class
discussion and essay writing.
CHI642, Term 2—This term focuses on science and technological imagination in modern China through intensive reading of the awardwinning novel The Three-Body Problem. Students will hone their critical literacy skills through various authentic Chinese resources—written,
oral, cultural, and multimedia. They will also enhance their cultural competency by reading science fiction novels, leading class discussions,
and writing essays regarding humanity's future.
CHI643, Term 3—This term introduces students to Chinese cultural creations by analyzing various aspects of Chinese movies, including
storytelling tactics, script writing, digital technology, and the influence of artificial intelligence (AI) technologies on making films. Beyond
closely analyzing two sci-fi movies, The Wondering Earth I and II, students will stimulate their creative imagination and interest in humanity and the natural sciences. In addition, this course will also engage students in discussing current news events worldwide. By the end of the
course, students will continue to develop critical thinking skills, improve their analytical and interpretive skills in Chinese, and have a deeper
understanding of Chinese cultural values and worldwide influence.
Prerequisite: Completion of CHI540 or permission of the department chair.

96

Return to Table of Contents

CLASSICS
Greek
Through the study of Greek, the Department of Classics offers students a direct entry into Greek literature. The Greek alphabet is easily
mastered in the first few class meetings, and students quickly discover that the poetic and expressive qualities of Greek language and
literature stimulate the imagination and illuminate the early political and intellectual development of the Mediterranean basin.

Beginning Attic Greek
CLA150A
CLA150B
(T1, T2)

This course introduces students directly to the classical Greek of Periclean Athens through a series of readings that present not only the
vocabulary, forms, and syntax of the language, but also the thoughts, feelings, and actions that characterized Greek culture. Though preliminary selections are necessarily simplified, within the first year students will be reading excerpts in their original form from the Greek
masterpieces, always with the purpose of understanding the spirit of the people who produced them.

Beginning Attic Greek
CLA250
(T1, T3)

A continuation of CLA150. Successful completion prepares students for CLA400.

Beginning Ancient Greek
CLA400A
CLA400B
CLA400C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This course introduces students directly to the classical Greek of Periclean Athens through a series of readings that present not only the
vocabulary, forms, and syntax of the language, but also the thoughts, feelings, and actions that characterized Greek culture. Though preliminary selections are necessarily simplified, within the first year students are reading excerpts in their original form from the Greek masterpieces, always with the purpose of understanding the spirit of the people who produced them. GRK150A, -150B, and -250C are for students
with no experience in classical languages. CLA400 is for students who have taken Latin (or other classical language) and will feature
additional work in comparative grammar between the languages.
Prerequisite for CLA400: LTN300.

Ancient Greek: Homer and Classical Authors
CLA500A
CLA500B
CLA500C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

CLA500 is the department’s offering for students to read, at an advanced level, seminal texts from the corpus of Greek literature. Students
have the opportunity to read, in the original Greek, selected works of Homer, Lysias, Euripides, Herodotus, or Plato. Authors will be chosen
by the instructor in consultation with the students in the class. As always, we will pay attention to points of grammar and syntax, but will
also endeavor to connect the literature to the contemporary Greek culture at the time and, perhaps more importantly, to our own.
Prerequisite: GRK250 or CLA400

Latin
The Department of Classics offers students a direct entry into the traditional Latin literary curriculum while at the same time providing students with an opportunity to develop a more sophisticated historical and international perspective. Whenever possible, traditional language
study is supplemented with readings in English that address both ancient and modern cultural concerns.

First-Level Latin
LTN100A
LTN100B
LTN100C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

The purpose of the course is to teach students the basic features of the Latin language and of Roman culture in relation to other cultures,
e.g., family life and societal relationships, slavery, travel, sports, life in the big city, entertainment, and education. Students learn the
traditional forms and syntax. All six tenses, indicative and passive, are covered, as well as all five declensions of nouns, three declensions of
adjectives, and the standard pronouns. There is extensive practice in recognizing endings of nouns, adjectives, pronouns, and verbs, as well
as case uses and normal Latin sentence structures, with the goal of mastering basic techniques of accurate translation and comprehension of
Latin sentences and stories.

97

Return to Table of Contents

First- and Second-Level Latin, Intensive
LTN150A
LTN150B
LTN150C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This course covers in one year the essential elements of LTN100 and LTN200.

Second-Level Latin
LTN200A
LTN200B
LTN200C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

During Term 1, the linguistic and cultural approach of LTN100 is continued as the class reviews and completes the basic grammar
(including participles, subjunctives, and indirect statements) and reads about other aspects of Roman life. In Term 2 and Term 3, students
read selections from Caesar, Livy, and Ovid.

Third-Level Latin: Livy, Catullus, Cicero, Vergil
LTN300A
LTN300B
LTN300C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

Students begin Term 1 with a thorough review of the Latin language in conjunction with correlated reading passages. In the latter half of
Term 1, students read selections from Livy or Cicero. In Term 2, students read the lyric love poetry of Catullus and selections from Cicero’s
speech, Pro Caelio, defending one of Catullus’s former friends against charges brought by the woman to whom Catullus wrote his most
famous poems. In Term 3, students read selections from Book II of Vergil’s Aeneid, the story of the Trojan Horse and the destruction of
Troy, a heroic backdrop for very human struggles of duty and loyalty among women and men, parents and children, leaders and followers,
humans and their gods.

Fourth-Level Latin
LTN401
LTN402
LTN403
(T1, T2, T3)

The Latin 400 series is a curriculum designed for students emerging from Latin 300 who would like more practice translating and
analyzing Latin literature before they take on the rigors of Latin 520 (Vergil and Caesar) or Latin 600 (Latin lyric poetry). In this sequence,
students will explore voces extra aureum (Latin texts from before and after the Golden Age), reading literature of different genres and eras
than is offered elsewhere in our curriculum. Students will gain extensive experience with translation and analysis, and they will examine
themes with contemporary relevance (e.g., social class and slavery, family and gender, freedom and empire); each term may also contain a
research component.
LTN401, Term 1—The Founding Tales of Livy. Examination of significant reported events from early Roman history (starting c. 753 BCE)
via translation of Livy’s prose, with opportunity for independent translation and research.
LTN402, Term 2—The Comedy of Terence. Introduction to comedy and Terence (born in Carthage c. 195 BCE, brought as an enslaved
person to Rome, and ultimately freed), with exposure to colloquial Latin.
LTN403, Term 3—The History of Tacitus. In-depth study of historian Tacitus (56–120 CE) and his treatment of libertas, empire, and tyranny under Silver Age emperors.
Prerequisite: Completion of LTN300

Elective Courses
The Art of Persuasion
CLA420
(T2, T3)

This course is open only to Seniors. Since well before the rise of rhetoric as a discipline, the art of persuasion has been a powerful tool for
those who are skilled in its use. In this writing-based course, students will examine the use of language (and images) by people whose goals,
livelihoods, or even lives depended upon persuading others. From logographers in the courtrooms of fifth century BCE Athens to presentday politicians, lawyers, advertisers, and confidence players, people who can wield language have immense power over those unaware of its
subliminal influence. Beginning with the study of Aristotle and progressing to the analysis of current media strategies, this course is at the
same time traditionally academic and immediately practicable.

98

Return to Table of Contents

The Epic Tradition
CLA551
(T1)

Every Epic needs its hero. But what else does it require? A journey, an antagonist, a purpose? In this course, we will examine the tradition
of Epic poetry and literature, looking at the conventions and traditions it has instilled into our modern consciousness. This project-based
course will draw from texts, ancient and modern, oral and written, literary and cinematic. Although not required, students with experience
in Latin or Greek may continue working with ancient texts in the original language. This course is open to all seniors or with permission
from the Classics Department chair.

Women in Antiquity
CLA552 (may be taken as a Classics or Interdisciplinary course; official course number is CLA552)
(T3)

One credit assigned in Classics or Interdisciplinary. The literary woman in antiquity and the actual woman in antiquity are rather different concepts. In classical literature, we can find numerous examples of powerful, erudite, and accomplished women; however, in classical
history, these examples are few. In this course, we will look at this variance and try to determine how it came to be, especially in societies
whose own deities were often female. We will pay close attention to literary figures such as Helen, Andromache, Medea, Lysistrata, Lucretia,
Lesbia, and Dido, and we will examine the life of the actual woman in the classical world in order to see how her experience compares with
her literary counterpart. Although not required, students with experience in Latin or Greek may continue working with ancient texts in the
original language.
Prerequisite: This course is open to all Seniors or with permission from the Classics Department chair.

How to Find Home(r)
CLA553
(T2)

Of Homer’s two surviving epics, the Odyssey is often the more beloved than the Iliad. But it is also a more vexing and inconsistent poem,
challenging our concepts of the hero and the hero’s place in the world. In its simplest form, the Odyssey tells the story of a soldier’s journey
home; in a more complex form, it also reminds us how we can never truly return home, at least in the same way in which we left it. This
seminar will explore the tradition of Homer’s Odyssey, beginning with reading the epic and then following the threads of influence as they
stretch out through the centuries: from Vergil and Dante, all the way to James Joyce and Derek Walcott. We will pay particular attention to
themes of nostalgia, fidelity, truth, and self-discovery. In addition, we will consider how soldiers are able (or unable) to adjust to postbellum life, both in ancient and modern contexts, using Dr. Jonathan Shay’s text Odysseus in America to begin our understanding of a veteran
soldier’s return from war. Although not required, students with experience in Latin or Greek may continue working with ancient texts in the
original language. This class is open to all Seniors or with permission from the Classics Department chair.

Advanced Courses
Vergil/Caesar
LTN520A
LTN520B
LTN520C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

Students read the entire Aeneid in English and substantial selections of Books I, II, IV, and VI in Latin, examining Vergil’s literary form
and technique, as well as the philosophical and political dimensions of his age. Students then turn to Latin prose, reading selections from
Caesar’s Commentaries on the Gallic War. Cicero himself called Caesar the most eloquent of all Romans. His Latin, pure and unadorned,
provides an excellent balance to Vergil’s tragic style.
Prerequisite: A grade of 5 or higher in LTN300 or permission of the department.

Advanced Latin Authors
LTN601
LTN602
LTN603
(T1, T2, T3)

This is primarily a literature course that explores works in the original Latin.
LTN601, Term 1—Students read Lyric Poetry, beginning with Catullus and continuing with Horace after the midterm. Although their lifetimes overlapped, Catullus flourished during the time of Julius Caesar and the crumbling Roman Republic, whereas Horace wrote his Odes
after civil war had established the reign of Augustus, the first emperor of Rome. Beyond appreciating the magnificent and still resonant ars
of these two famous poets, students will compare the differences in their styles, personae, and philosophies, and discuss how these reflect not
just each artist’s poetic voice, but the contemporary political regime as well.
LTN602, Term 2—Students focus on Ancient Rhetoric, beginning with an examination of Platonic vs. Aristotelian ideals of rhetoric,
and continuing with a more detailed study of Ciceronian precepts of oratory. While translation and discussion of selections from Cicero’s
speeches, essays, and letters are the focus of this term’s scholarship, students also make connections with modern examples of persuasive
technique in the form of advertisements, popular songs, and political speeches.

99

Return to Table of Contents

LTN603, Term 3—While students in LTN601 have some choice about the authors and readings for Term 3, they will begin with several
selections from Ovid’s Metamorphoses.
Prerequisite: The prerequisite for any term of LTN601 is a 5 or above in LTN520. An additional prerequisite for LTN603 is a 5 or above in
LTN601 or LTN602.

Elective Courses Recently Taught but Not Offered in 2024–2025
Etymology
CLA410

French
French is a world language spoken on five continents and in many international organizations, such as the United Nations, UNESCO, and
NATO. It is an official language of more than 30 countries, including Belgium, Canada, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Guinea, Haiti, Senegal, and Switzerland. L’Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie has 56 member states. While France is the most
visited country in the world and famous for many reasons—including its cultural heritage, beauty, food, and art of living—the importance of
French extends far beyond France.
The French Department offers courses at six different levels, from beginning through advanced and beyond to courses for fluent speakers.
At all levels, classes are conducted entirely in French, and in all courses French is taught in cultural contexts. The first two years emphasize
basic language structures; the third serves as a transition to advanced courses that offer in-depth study of the literature and civilization of
France and other French-speaking areas around the world. Each year, the Academy enrolls French-speaking students from abroad who
provide important firsthand contact with francophone cultures. Students may spend a full academic year or a summer in Rennes, France,
through the School Year Abroad program. Information on this and other off-campus opportunities can be obtained from the Department of
World Languages.

First-Level French, Complete Beginner
FRE100A
FRE100B
FRE100C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This course is designed for entering students who have no prior experience of French. Students acquire the four essential skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing in French in an immersive setting and in the cultural context of the French-speaking world. The course
emphasizes authentic communication. Textbook: D’accord 1.

First-Level French, Semi-Beginner
FRE105A
FRE105B
FRE105C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This immersive course is designed for entering students who have some prior experience of French but need more preparation before starting a second-level course. The four essential skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing are developed in the cultural context of the
French-speaking world. The course emphasizes authentic communication. Textbook: D’accord 1.

Second-Level French, General Studies
FRE200A
FRE200B
FRE200C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This immersive course is designed for students who have completed FRE100 or -105, and for new students who qualify through a placement test. While continuing to develop the four essential skills and their cultural competence, students engage with more complex authentic
materials and write short compositions. Students practice grammar structures and idiomatic expressions that are most useful in everyday
situations. Textbook: D’accord 2

Second-Level French, In-Depth Studies
FRE204A
FRE204B
FRE204C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This immersive course is designed for students who have completed FRE100 or -105, and for new students who qualify through a placement
test. While continuing to develop the four essential skills and their cultural competence, students read substantial authentic texts, explore
a variety of authentic media in French, discuss cultural topics in detail, and write longer paragraphs. The units covered are the same as in
FRE200. Textbook: D’accord 2

100

Return to Table of Contents

Third-Level French, General Studies
FRE300A
FRE300B
FRE300C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This immersive course is designed for students who have completed FRE200 or -204, and for new students who qualify through a placement test. Students continue to develop the four essential skills through a comprehensive grammar review and the exploration of a variety
of sources such as short films, short books of fiction, and online resources. They develop their cultural competence and critical thinking in
French for everyday communication. Textbook: D’accord 3

Second-Level French, In-Depth Studies
FRE304A
FRE304B
FRE304C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This immersive course is designed for students who have completed FRE200 or -204, and for new students who qualify through a placement test. Students continue to develop the four essential skills, their cultural competence, and their critical thinking skills. They learn to
express more abstract ideas and delve into more complex grammatical structures. They write short essays and explore a variety of intermediate-level media in French. This course is the best preparation for FRE401. The textbook units covered are the same as in FRE300. Textbook:
D’accord 3

Advanced Courses
Inquiry-Based Approaches to the Francophone World
FRE401
FRE402
FRE403
(T1, T2, T3)

This course is intended for students who understand, read, and write French well and already speak at a competent level, but would like to
develop further conversational skills and acquire the vocabulary and idiomatic expression necessary to be able to discuss and write about
major cultural and social issues. Students will use literary texts, film, TV programming, and journalism to provide a basis on which to discuss
and understand issues in the francophone world. An inquiry-based learning approach will guide this course each term as students plan and
complete a variety of individual and group projects designed to inform themselves and their classmates about the francophone world.
Prerequisite: Completion of FRE300 or FRE304.

Francophone Civilizations, Literatures, Cultures, and Cinemas
FRE521
FRE522
FRE523
(T1, T2, T3)

Open to students who have completed at least two terms of fourth-level French and to qualified new students. Students explore works of
literature, films, and current events to develop their critical-thinking skills and understand the cultural and social contexts of the Frenchspeaking world. The course also includes instruction in language skills and in the methodology of expository writing in French.

Advanced Topics in French
FRE621
FRE622
FRE623
(T1, T2, T3)

Open to students who have completed at least two terms of fifth-level French and to qualified new students. Students delve into a specific
topic each term in an immersive seminar setting. The course uses a variety of media to explore the cultures, histories, current events, and
languages of French-speaking countries around the world. It is based on discussion and projects. Recent topics have included Introduction
to Translation, Philosophers and Current Events, Business French, and On the road(s) of francophone culture and expression in North
America: Kerouac’s French writings.

German
The German Department offers courses at six different levels, from beginning through advanced and beyond. At all levels, current film,
songs, poetry, and theatre enhance the study of grammar, reading, writing, listening, and speaking. No prior world language experience is
necessary to begin the study of German; many students discover that learning German enhances their comprehension of English grammar.
Study abroad opportunities facilitated by the German Department include a three-week homestay program offered by the American
Association of Teachers of German as well as the Congress Bundestag Gap Year program.

101

Return to Table of Contents

First-Level German
GER100A
GER100B
GER100C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

A yearlong elementary course in speaking, reading, writing, listening comprehension, and culture. No previous experience in German or any
other world language is needed to enroll in this course. GER100 offers significant daily structure and support in order to facilitate successful
language learning. Current text: Deutsch Sprachlehre Plus (Hueber) supplemented by digital exercises, video, documentaries focusing on the
division of Berlin, film (Goodbye Lenin), songs, and adapted short stories.

Second-Level German
GER200A
GER200B
GER200C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

Open to students who have successfully completed GER100 or its equivalent. The study of basic grammar and conversation are continued
along with the development of reading and writing skills. Current materials: Deutsch Sprachlehre Plus (Hueber), Emil und die Detective, by
Erich Kästner, and the documentary Herr Bachmann und seine Klasse.

Accelerated Second-Level German
GER250
(T1)

Open to students with strong language-learning skills who have completed GER100 or its equivalent with distinction and who have the
permission of the department chair. This accelerated course develops the language skills in speaking, listening comprehension, reading,
and writing. Greater emphasis on classroom discussion as well as short essay writing is introduced. Current texts: Vater und Sohn, by E.O.
Plauen. Successful completion of this course qualifies students to enter GER300B in Term 2.

Third-Level German
GER300A
GER300B
GER300C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

GER300A, Term 1—Open to students who have successfully completed GER200 or its equivalent. This course continues to develop
language skills in speaking, listening comprehension, reading, and writing. Greater emphasis on classroom discussion as well as short
essay writing is introduced. Current text: Vater und Sohn, by E.O. Plauen. This is the first course in the yearlong sequence of GER300A,
GER300B, and GER300C.
GER300B, Term 2—Open to students who have successfully completed GER300A or GER250 or its equivalent. The emphasis this term is
on vocabulary building, reading, and more advanced grammar (introduction of relative clauses, the subjunctive and the passive). Current
materials: Sophie Scholl—Die Weiße Rose by Achim Seiffarth.
GER300C, Term 3—Open to students who have successfully completed GER300B. Our focus in the spring term will be on the Stolperstein
project by the German artist Günter Demnig. Primary sources will include the documentary Stolperstein as well as newspaper articles and
TV interviews. Successful completion of this course satisfies the diploma requirement in German.

Fourth-Level German Options
Students who have successfully completed GER300 or its equivalent (and hence fulfilled their diploma requirement) have the option of continuing their study of German with either fourth-level (GER401, -402, -403) or advanced fourth-level German (GER501, -502, -503).
The syllabus for both sequences is the same, and the courses are often taught together. However the expectations for the 500 sequence are
higher and are reflected in the grading scale. In both fourth-level courses, students learn advanced grammar and read a wide variety of German
works in the original.
• Students who wish to take a term-contained fourth-level course and who would benefit from review of basic grammar should sign up for
GER401, -402, and/or -403. For the term-by-term syllabus for this sequence, refer to GER501, -502, -503.
• Students whose grammar skills are strong should sign up for GER501, -502, and or -503.

Fourth-Level German
GER401
GER402
GER403
(T1, T2, T3)

Term-contained and open to students who have successfully completed GER300 or its equivalent, this course is ideal for students who are
looking to review the first three years of grammar. Vocabulary expansion increased oral fluency through daily classroom discussion, and

102

Return to Table of Contents

written accuracy through paragraph writing and rewriting are central to this course. For differentiation between this course and German
-520, -520A, and -520B, see description above.
GER401, Term 1—see GER501
GER402, Term 2—see GER502
GER403, Term 3—see GER503
Prerequisite: GER300 or permission of the department chair.

Advanced Fourth-Level German
GER501
GER502
GER503
(T1, T2, T3)

GER501, Term 1—The first term of a yearlong sequence, this course is open to students who have successfully completed GER300 or its
equivalent with a high 5 or a 6 and whose grammar skills are strong. Vocabulary expansion, increased oral fluency through daily classroom
discussion, and written accuracy through paragraph writing and rewriting are central to this course. For differentiation between this course
and GER401, see description above. Current fall term materials: Grammar, concrete poetry, current events, and songs.
Prerequisite: Completion of GER300 with a high 5 or a 6 or permission of the department chair.
GER502, Term 2—Current materials: Grammar, Biedermann und die Brandstifter by Max Frisch, current events, and songs.
Prerequisite: GER501
GER503, Term 3—Current materials: Wer früher stirbt ist länger tot (film), children’s stories, current events, songs.
Prerequisite: GER502

Advanced Topics in German
GER601
GER602
GER603
(T1, T2, T3)

Open to students who have successfully completed three terms of fourth-level German (-401, -402, -403 or -501, -502, -503) or their equivalent, this course varies with the needs of the class. It is usually a seminar in the reading and discussion of German novels, plays, and current
events along with the viewing and discussion of contemporary films. The syllabus is on a two-year rotation. Students may take the course two
years in a row.
Current materials: Der Besuch der alten Dame (Dürrenmatt), 46 Heiligabende (Kästner), Die Physiker (Dürrenmatt), Schachnovelle (Zweig),
Dürfen Schwarze Blumen Malen (Otoo), short stories (Kafka), Der Erlkönig (Goethe)

Greek—see Classics
Japanese
Japanese 100
JPN100A
JPN100B
JPN100C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

Open to all students. This course introduces the Japanese sound and writing system, basic Japanese grammar, and how to approach learning
foreign languages. We use the textbook and workbook げんき.
JPN100A, Term 1—Students will strive to master one of the writing system sets, ひらがな. Concurrently they will learn numbers and how to
use them (telephone numbers, asking for prices, telling time), be-verb (present aﬃrmative/present negative), introducing family and friends,
and general locations.
JPN100B, Term 2—Students will strive to master another set of Japanese writing system, カタカナ. The grammar structure of action verbs
will be introduced. Students will learn three diﬀerent categories of verbs and present aﬃrmative/present negative conjugations. They will
also learn to identify the diﬀerence between transitive/intransitive verbs. Vocabulary related to actions in everyday life at school and home
will be introduced.
JPN100C, Term 3—Introduction to Kanji characters will take place. This involves diﬀerent pronunciation of each character, stroke order,
and combination with other characters. Approximately 25 Kanjis will be learned. Grammar will cover the past aﬃrmative/past negative
conjugations for both be-verbs and action verbs. Students will learn to expand the sentences by adding when, where, how often, how long,
with whom, etc. Another large category of grammar to be introduced is adjectives. Students will learn to identify two diﬀerent categories of
adjectives and how to use them.

103

Return to Table of Contents

Japanese 200
JPN200A
JPN200B
JPN200C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

Open to students who have successfully completed first-level Japanese or its equivalent. A continuation of JPN100.
JPN200A, Term 1—Students will strive to master approximately 30 Kanji characters. Concurrently they will learn how to ask/give permissions, oﬀer help, and ask for favors. Specific grammar structure associated with these objectives are the verb/adjective conjugations to
TE-form in order to elongate the sentences. Vocabulary related to permission and physical descriptions will be introduced.
JPN200B, Term 2—Students will strive to master approximately 30 Kanji characters. Concurrently they will learn how to express thoughts
(past and present), convey messages, and reason/justify actions. Specific grammar structure associated with these objectives are the verb/
adjective conjugations to short-form, NAI-form, and nounizing the verbs. Structure of subjunctive clause will be introduced as well.
JPN200C, Term 3—Students will strive to master approximately 30 Kanji characters. Concurrently they will learn how to make comparison, the means of transportation for travels, and talk about future dreams. Specific grammar structure associated with these objectives is to
add several auxiliary phrases to verbs. Also, the verb conjugation of TA-form will be introduced.

Japanese 300
JPN300A
JPN300B
JPN300C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This course is a continuation of JPN200 and the last phase of language requirement. We continue to use the textbook and workbook げんき.
JPN300A, Term 1—Students will strive to master approximately 45 new Kanji characters. Concurrently they will learn how to advise,
describe predictions, and explain physical conditions. The first series of textbook げんき will conclude. In preparation for moving on to the
second book of げんき, we will have intensive Kanji character reviews through reading various folktales.
JPN300B, Term 2—Students will strive to master approximately 45 new Kanji characters. Concurrently they will learn how to make/keep
promises, list reasons, describe what they can/cannot do, consult/seek advice, and make predictions and express opinions. Specific grammar
structure associated with these objectives are the verb/adjective conjugations to potential-form and various auxiliary phrases.
JPN300C, Term 3—Students will strive to master approximately 45 new Kanji characters. Concurrently they will learn how to invite, apologize, describe wishes, make analogies, and convey messages with detailed information. Specific grammar structure associated with these
objectives are to add several auxiliary phrases to verbs. More constructions of subjunctive clauses will be taught.

Japanese 400
JPN400A
JPN400B
JPN400C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This advanced level course will help review the grammar, vocabulary, and Kanji characters learned during the requirement phases before
adding more of these. Students will start applying the learned knowledge to more output mode of language acquisition. We continue using
the textbook and workbook げんき.
JPN400A, Term 1—Students will strive to master approximately 45 new Kanji characters. Concurrently they will learn honorifics, express
gratitude, and ask for directions in details. We will spend an extensive amount of time working to comprehend the structure of Japanese
society in order to utilize the most appropriate forms of honorifics.
JPN400B, Term 2—Students will strive to master approximately 45 new Kanji characters. Concurrently they will learn how to make commands, describe experiences, and complain. Specific grammar structure
associated with these objectives are the verb/adjective conjugations to causative-form, passive voice, various auxiliary phrases, and more
subordinate clauses.
JPN400C, Term 3—Students will strive to master approximately 45 new Kanji characters. As a wrap-up, students will complete the proficiency portfolio, which will be used as a personal study guide and reference for the future.
Prerequisite: Completion of 300-level Japanese or approval of the department chair.

Japanese 500
JPN520A
JPN520B
JPN520C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This is a term-contained course. We rotate the topics of intensive reading on Japanese History, Japanese Pop Culture, and Japanese
Traditional Culture.
Prerequisite: Completion of 400-level Japanese or approval of the department chair.

104

Return to Table of Contents

Japanese 600
JPN601
JPN602
JPN603
(T1, T2, T3)

We will use the textbook An Introduction to Japanese History, written in Japanese. Students will not only learn historic facts, but also terminology and academic writing in Japanese.
JPN601, Term 1—Ancient to 12th Century
JPN602, Term 2—12th to 17th Century
JPN603, Term 3—17th Century to Present
Prerequisite: Completion of 520-level Japanese or approval of the department chair.

Latin—see Classics

Russian
With the demise of the Soviet Union and resulting rapid expansion in East-West activity, the ability to communicate in Russian and knowledge of Russian culture have lost none of their importance. At the beginning of the 21st century, there are more contacts now with Russia
and countries of the former Soviet Union than ever before. Not only are American business, science, and technology clamoring for Russian
speakers to work in and with the new Russia, but Russian remains the lingua franca in all the former Soviet republics, making it extremely
important now for national security reasons as well.
No prior world language experience is necessary to begin the study of Russian and students begin Russian coming from all sorts of backgrounds—some having studied another world language, others not. Before studying Russian, many consider it strange and difficult, but its
alphabet and vocabulary have the same sources as English, and it follows many of the same principles of grammar. Continuous oral, visual,
and instructional use quickly make Russian familiar and enjoyable.
The Russian department offers a five-year course of study. This well-established program ensures confident progress in speaking, aural comprehension, reading, and writing. Elementary courses use a unique digital textbook to strengthen grammar skills and improve vocabulary
learning. At the upper levels, students continue to use iPads for reading in Russian with built-in dictionaries. Video is used throughout to
improve understanding of culture as well as language. Students who have had success in another world language or who have some prior
experience with Russian are encouraged to consider taking RUS150 after the second term of RUS100B. It is the policy of the Division of
World Languages to use the target language exclusively in the classroom. Students enrolled in all Russian courses are required to have an
iPad in lieu of textbooks or workbooks throughout their Andover Russian career.

First-Level Contemporary Russian
RUS100A
RUS100B
RUS100C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

A yearlong elementary course in speaking, listening, reading, and writing. Texts: all-digital textbook (for the iPad—see note in introduction)
developed by the department for exclusive use at PA; reference materials.

Accelerated First-Level Russian
RUS150A
RUS150B

Open to students who have completed RUS100B with distinction and who have been recommended by their instructor. Superior work in
this course enables students to enter RUS250 to begin the second year, followed by RUS300B and RUS300C subsequent, thereby completing three years of Russian language in two years. An accelerated course in grammar, speaking, listening comprehension, reading, and
culture. Texts: the same as those of RUS100 and RUS200.

Second-Level Contemporary Russian
RUS200A
RUS200B
RUS200C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

Completion of the elementary course with continued emphasis on active use. Texts: all-digital textbook developed by the department for
exclusive use at Phillips Academy; reference materials.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of RUS100.

105

Return to Table of Contents

Accelerated Second-Level Russian
RUS250
(T1)

Open to students with strong learning skills who have completed RUS150 or its equivalent with distinction. This accelerated course
completes the work of RUS200 with the addition of intensive grammar review and writing. Successful completion of this course qualifies
students to enter RUS300B. Texts: the same as those of RUS200 and RUS300A.

Third-Level Russian
RUS300A
RUS300B
RUS300C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

Students will improve conversation and composition skills through work with selected 19th- and 20th-century short stories and with video
materials. A review of problematic areas of grammar is integrated into the course. Work with video and audio materials constitutes an
important component of the course.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of RUS200 or RUS250.

Fourth-Level Russian
RUS401
RUS402
RUS403
(T1, T2, T3)

Expanded work in conversation, listening comprehension, and composition. Extensive use of videos as a source of culture and for conversation and understanding daily speech. Texts will become less modified as the year progresses.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of RUS300.

Advanced Fourth-Level Russian
RUS520A
RUS520B
RUS520C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

The core materials of the course are similar to those used in Fourth-Level Russian. The work will be more in depth than the 400 course.
Prerequisite: A grade of 5 or above in RUS300 or permission of the department chair.

Advanced Topics in Russian
RUS601
RUS602
RUS603
(T1, T2, T3)

A central goal of this course is to provide students with an overview of the major themes and developments in the last two centuries of
Russian literature and history. While the topics may change from term to term and year to year, recent topics have included early 20thcentury Russian history, LGBTQ history in Russia, and modern global issues such as declining populations, “brain drain,” and climate
change.
Prerequisite: Successful completion of RUS403 or RUS520.

Elective Courses Recently Taught but Not Offered in 2024–2025
A Short Course in Beginning Russian
RUS130

Spanish
The Spanish Department offers a six-year course of study. Students learn to understand, speak, read, and write in Spanish, while also receiving a comprehensive introduction to the cultural and literary diversity of Latin America, Spain, and the Latinx communities in the US. To
enhance a student’s language experience, the department offers several immersive opportunities to study abroad through the Academy’s
Learning in the World programs. Students can travel to Madrid, Spain through the INESLE program; to Zaragoza, Spain, through the School
Year Abroad (SYA) program; and to Buenos Aires, Argentina, through the ¡Relindo! Language and Culture Immersion. Further information
is available through the Learning in the World website.
The Spanish Department implements an immersive and communicative approach to language learning. All classes are conducted entirely
in Spanish. Students develop their communication skills for a variety of purposes: to speak and write with clarity and fluency, to interpret
authentic multimedia texts with precision and insight, and to engage meaningfully with people in many different contexts. With culture at
the heart of the curriculum, we endeavor to provide students with relevant experiences and real-world tasks in and outside of the classroom.

106

Return to Table of Contents

First-Level Spanish
SPA100A
SPA100B
SPA100C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This course is designed for language learners who enter at the Novice Low category according to ACFTL standards and, over the course
of the year, will prepare learners to reach the Novice High to Intermediate Low status. This course emphasizes interpersonal, presentational,
interpretive, and intercultural modes of communication evenly and makes use of authentic sources of input and rigorous forms of output.
All class work is conducted in Spanish.

Second-Level Spanish
SPA200A
SPA200B
SPA200C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

This course is designed for language learners who enter at the Novice High category according to ACFTL standards and, over the course
of the year, will prepare learners to reach Intermediate Mid status. This course emphasizes interpersonal, presentational, interpretive, and
intercultural modes of communication evenly and makes use of authentic sources of input and rigorous forms of output. All class work is
conducted in Spanish.

Third-Level Spanish
SPA300A
SPA300B
SPA300C
(T1, T2, T3) THREE-TERM COMMITMENT

SPA300 is a course for those who have completed SPA200 or have been otherwise placed at this level. At the end of the year, students are
expected to attain a high-intermediate level of proficiency, as described by the ACTFL scale. All the grammar notions and communicative
functions presented are closely intertwined with the content, which focuses on a different subject each term. Throughout the year, students
read authentic texts from a variety of genres: poetry, songs, short stories, short plays, newspaper opinion articles, reports, cartoons, essays,
and interviews.

Advanced Courses
Current Events and Multimedia: Approaches to the Hispanic World
SPA401
SPA402
SPA403
(T1, T2, T3)

SPA401, Term 1—Spain. Students will refine speaking, writing, and listening skills in Spanish as well as their ability to express current
issues through a cultural context. This course will use literary texts, film, TV program series, and journalism to provide a basis on which to
discuss and understand issues of modern Spain from the post-Franco era to the present. The course will begin a comprehensive review of
basic to advanced grammar structures for students thinking about taking the various national Spanish exams. Class requirements include
essays, tests, oral class presentations, and recordings. Daily class participation is essential.
SPA402, Term 2—Hispanic Caribbean. Students will refine their speaking and writing skills through the analysis of poetry and short stories
of select Caribbean authors. This course will use Caribbean poetry, short stories, film, music, and journalism to provide a basis on which to
discuss and analyze current and historical issues of Puerto Rico, Cuba, and the Dominican Republic. In addition, the course will complete
the review of basic to advanced grammar structures started in Term 1 and Term 2. Class requirements include essays and oral class presentations. Daily class participation is essential.
SPA403, Term 3—Mexico. Students will refine their speaking, writing, and listening skills in Spanish as well as their ability to express current issues through a cultural context. This course will use literary texts, film, and art to provide a basis on which to discuss and understand
the historical facts that shaped Mexico from the Mexican Revolution to the present. The study of grammar will concentrate on the more
challenging structures for English speakers, continuing the grammar review started in Term 1 SPA401. Daily class participation is essential.

Explorations of Texts and Contexts in Hispanic Literature
SPA411
SPA412
SPA413
(TI, T2, T3)

This course presents a thematic approach to the study of Spanish and Spanish-American literature and culture. The readings allow students
to examine the universality of literature, and make comparisons and connections through historical and contemporary cultural contexts.
Students will explore the interdisciplinary connections between literary works and other artistic forms of expression such as music, painting,
architecture, and film. This course prepares students to read and critically analyze representative works of Hispanic literature in all genres.
Students will focus on the terminology of textual analysis, learn to identify the different elements of style, and interpret texts in correct oral
and written Spanish. This course explicitly addresses each of the following themes: societies in contact, gender as construct, time and space,
literary creation, interpersonal relationships, and duality of being. All instruction, discussion, and writing are in Spanish in order to support
the development of students’ language proficiency.

107

Return to Table of Contents

SPA411, Term 1—Students will read essays, poems, and short stories by contemporary Latin American and Spanish authors including works
by women and people of color.
SPA412, Term 2—In addition to analyzing poems and short stories, students will explore universal themes in a full length play by Federico
García Lorca.
SPA413, Term 3—Students will read a full-length novel by Nobel Laureate Gabriel García Márquez.

Taking the Streets: Art and Social Movements in Latin America and the U.S.
SPA501
(T1)

What do 21st-century social movements teach us about Latin America and Latinx communities? What can they accomplish? What role do
artistic expressions and street performances play in protesting hostile government policies? This course will analyze various new and old
cultural practices used in recent social justice movements across Latin America and the United States to identify key patterns and tactics,
establish connections with previous street protests and artworks, and reflect on their struggles and achievements. Through the exposure
to and the analysis of these practices, students will attempt to create written and visual products as well as short performances that aim to
inspire social change. Some study cases include but are not limited to Indigenous peoples’ environmental movements, mobilizations against
gentrification, and feminist and LGBTQIA+ collective actions.
Prerequisites: Open to students who have completed three terms of fourth-level Spanish (SPA401, -402, -403, -411, -412, and/or -413) or
native/heritage Spanish-speaking background with the department chairs permission. Students with fewer than three terms of prerequisite
courses should seek approval from the department chair.

Afro-Latinidad and the Diasporic Experience in Hispanic Culture and Literature
SPA502
(T2)

This course will explore Black identity and the politics of race in the Spanish-speaking world. Students will examine literary and cultural
works that provide historical, political, and social context for how people of African descent negotiate transcultural spaces in the U.S. and
Latin America. While centering Blackness, students will also consider intersections of gender, class, and sexuality. National, geographical,
and linguistic identities will be the basis for further study of this historically marginalized and racialized group. Other topics include African
influence in music, religious syncretism, (mis)representation, and other -isms.
Prerequisites: Open to students who have completed three terms of fourth-level Spanish (SPA401, -402, -403, -411, -412, and/or -413), or
native/heritage Spanish-speaking background with department chair’s permission. Students with fewer than three terms of prerequisite
courses should seek approval from the department chair.

Latino City: A Community-Based History of Lawrence
SPA503
(T3)

SPA503 is a community-based course that immerses students in the stories of the Immigrant City, Lawrence, Massachusetts. As one of
New England’s original gateway cities, Lawrence attracted people from diverse regions of the world to provide labor during the Industrial
Revolution and became an international economic powerhouse in its heyday. Disinvestment and out-migration following World War II
left Lawrence a virtual ghost town until a new wave of migrants, mostly from Latin America, breathed life into the seven-square-mile city,
making it New England’s first city with a Latino majority.
We will begin our program with a brief history of the region to understand the push-and-pull factors that have influenced the local identity
over millennia. We then will undertake the collection, preservation, and curation of video oral histories with community members living,
learning, and working in Lawrence. We will contribute our products to the archives of the Lawrence History Center and the “Somos Latinos”
public history exhibit of the Lawrence Heritage State Park. Outcomes include but are not limited to: deepened solidarity with our community partners; enhanced intercultural communication skills; broader awareness of history and demographics in the Merrimack Valley;
and stronger competence in video production techniques. The course will be conducted entirely in Spanish, while texts and other resources
will be in Spanish and sometimes English; all outputs for public consumption will be in both Spanish and English to serve a multilingual,
multicultural population.
This course employs design principles of experiential education for global citizenship and is supported by Learning in the World,
Community Engagement, and the Spanish Department.
Note: To make the most of the off-campus experience this term, we will use the first 20 minutes of fifth period most weeks. Time will be
compensated accordingly on other days
Prerequisites: Open to students who have completed three terms of fourth-level Spanish (SPA401, -402, -403, -411, -412, and/or -413)
or have a native/heritage Spanish-speaking background, with department chair’s permission. Students with fewer than three terms of
prerequisite courses should seek approval from the department chair.

The Graphic Novel in Spanish
SPA521
SPA522
SPA523
(T1, T2, T3)

This course is an introduction to the reality of present-day Latin America through the study of its popular culture. The subject is approached
from a diachronic perspective starting in the 20th century, which entails reviewing some of the major historical events, but the spotlight is
on those aspects of everyday life that play a role in shaping the values of a community or contribute to creating a sense of identity: language,
religious beliefs, traditions, social movements, sports, and cultural production (music, cinema, and television; literature and visual arts).

108

Return to Table of Contents

From a linguistic point of view, students will continue to work on the four skills: reading (texts of various genres), writing (expository
writing), speaking (oral presentations and daily conversation practice), and listening (in class and at home—they need to watch a popular
telenovela or soap opera).
Prerequisites: Completion of SPA401, -402, -403, -411, -412, -413, or -501. Students with fewer than three terms of prerequisite courses
should seek approval from department chair.

“Our Americas”: Crossing Borders
SPA621
SPA622
SPA623
(T1, T2, T3)

One credit assigned each term in Spanish or Interdisciplinary. This post-Advanced course addresses the language as a tool that is transformed by the societies (in the United States, Latin America, or Spain) and historical events (the change of Latin language, the colonization
process, and the migration waves to the U.S.). Students will discover the fascinating origin of Spanish language and the ways it has been
changed, preserved, and sometimes disputed. The courses will provide students with theoretical notions to understand why languages
change, why bilingualism is not always valued in the same way, and how the personal, cognitive, and social experience of bilingual speakers
is, mainly in the U.S. Students will critically question the attitudes that people have toward the language, while also practicing the conventions and preparing to be able to express complex ideas around their academic fields in Spanish. These courses will provide elementary and
advanced grammar tools to students who have never studied the language and will reinforce the performance of those who have learned
Spanish mainly at school.
SPA621, Term 1—In this first term, students will learn to see Spanish language as an endlessly changing social system that has traveled
through continents and centuries, and that has accumulated a richness that belongs to all those who speak the language. With this approach,
students will gain a more detailed perspective around the current changes of the language in the world. We will study historical events in
Europe, Latin America, and the U.S. to understand how this language formed, changed, and has been preserved. We will discuss the influence of different languages into the Spanish, such as the Amerindian, the African, and the Arabic languages. The course will address some
canonical productions (music, literature...) that are an essential part of the Hispanic cultures and that have filled the language with voices
(quotes, sayings, verses, mottoes…). This course will provide elementary and advanced grammar tools to students who have never studied
the language and will reinforce the performance of those who have learned Spanish at school.
SPA622, Term 2—This course will focus on Latin America and will enable students to connect their academic/professional interests with
current issues in the region. The course will address four main topics along the term: the medicine and the unofficial curative practices
in Mexico; art and social reconstruction in Colombia; environmental studies in Peru; and human rights at the borders of El Salvador and
Guatemala. Students will identify a topic of interest and will develop linguistic and cultural skills to perform academic discussions around
their fields. Along with those topics, students will have numerous opportunities to practice academic oral presentations and written texts.
They also will have opportunities to reflect on what the definition of academic language is and how it looks in Spanish, as one of the goals of
this course is to provide a critical approach to the language, the normativity, and the institutions that preserve the standards of the language.
By the end of the term, students will create a CV and cover letter in Spanish and will conduct a professional job interview.
SPA623, Term 3—In the last series of the Americas, we will focus on the current cultural and demographic transformation that the United
States is experiencing due to the increasing number of immigrants from Latin America (thus the name “Latino”) coming to this country. We
will study how Latin American peoples, wherever their point of departure or destination, have had to negotiate from within this transnational cultural experience in the United States. We will analyze concepts of identity, bilingualism, migration, diaspora, crossing borders,
sense of home and belonging, and otherness. Students will analyze the role that languages have played in their education and will discuss
how to improve institutions and the social experience of younger generations. By the end of the term, we will create materials for Latinx
children to teach them different and new perspectives on migration, history, and identity.
Prerequisites: Completion of SPA501, -502, -503, -511, -512, -513, or native/heritage Spanish-speaking background, with department
chair’s permission. Students with fewer than three terms of prerequisite courses should seek approval from the department chair.

See Phillips Academy’s
Class Schedule

109

See the latest 2024–2025
Academic Year Calendar

Return to Table of Contents

